April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 • Pages XX–XX

SPECIAL ARTICLE

Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International
Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and
Septic Shock 2026

S

epsis, life-threatening acute organ dysfunction due to infection (1), is
a global health priority (2, 3) with approximately 49 million cases and
13 million sepsis-related deaths each year (4–6). Beyond being acutely
deadly, sepsis contributes to new and worsened physical, cognitive, and mental
health problems in many survivors (7, 8). Early identification and treatment are
critical to improving outcomes.
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) guidelines are intended to support clinicians caring for adult patients with sepsis, focusing on management in the hospital, the immediate prehospital setting, and the immediate post-hospital setting.
These guidelines incorporate principles of antimicrobial stewardship through
responsible antimicrobial use, proper diagnostic strategies, and de-escalation of
antimicrobial therapy. The recommendations reflect evidence-based best practice, distilling a large body of research into actionable recommendations. They
empower individuals and health systems to make informed choices about care
and support improvements in management and outcomes of sepsis (Table 1).

METHODS
Details on the guidelines scope, relationship to SSC bundles, history, and
sponsorship; committee selection, characteristics, and organization; conflicts
of interest management; patient, intervention, comparator, outcome (PICO)
question selection; outcomes prioritization; evidence synthesis; certainty of
evidence assessment; recommendation formulation; consensus voting; and
implications of strong vs. conditional recommendations are presented in
Supplemental Digital Content 1 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904). We
highlight key aspects of the methodology here.
The SSC guidelines were fully funded by Society of Critical Care Medicine
(SCCM) and European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM), with methodological support from the Guidelines in Intensive Care Medicine, Development,
and Evaluation group. Sponsoring professional societies supported the participation of their representatives. There was no industry support. The 69-person
guidelines committee had broad geographic diversity, representing 23 countries,
with 38% of panelists currently or previously practicing in a low- or middleincome country (LMIC). The guidelines committee also had broad diversity of
clinical professions and disciplines, as detailed in Supplemental Digital Content 1
(https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904). We convened a patient and family advisory
panel who worked with the committee throughout the guidelines development
process to ensure incorporation of patients’ values and preferences.
The guidelines committee was organized into six subgroups based on clinical domain: screening and early management; infection; hemodynamics;
Critical Care Medicine

Hallie C. Prescott

, MD, MSc1,2

Massimo Antonelli

, MD3,4

Waleed Alhazzani, MD, MSc, FRCPC5,6,7
Morten Hylander Møller, MD, PhD8,9
Fayez Alshamsi, MBBS10
Luciano C. P. Azevedo, MD, PhD11
Emilie Belley-Cote, MD, PhD12,13,14
Jan De Waele, MD PhD15,16
Lennie Derde, MD, PhD17,18
Joanna C. Dionne, MD, MSc, PhD,
FRCPC19,20
Laura Evans, MD21
Hayley B. Gershengorn, MD22,23
Carol L. Hodgson, PhD, PT, MPhils,
PGDip(Crit Care)24,25
Kimia Honarmand, MD, MSc, PhD26,27
Jozef Kesecioglu, MD, PhD28
Lauralyn McIntyre, MD29,30
Mervyn Mer, MD, PhD31
Mark E. Nunnally, MD32
Simon J. W. Oczkowski, MD20,27
Bram Rochwerg, MD, MSc, FRCPC,
FCCM, ATSF20,27
Olurotimi Olaolu Akinola, MBBS,
MMED33
Kwame A. Akuamoah-Boateng, DNP,
ACNP-BC, FCCM34
Laura Alberto, BN, Esp.Ed., MEd,
Com.Sc.(Dip), PhD35,36
Derek C. Angus, MD37
Yaseen M. Arabi, MD38

This
article
is
simultaneously published in the journals
Critical Care Medicine (10.1097/
CCM.0000000000007075)
and
Intensive Care Medicine (10.1007/
s00134-026-08361-1). All Rights
Reserved.
Copyright © 2026 by the Society
of Critical Care Medicineand the
European Society of Intensive Care
Medicine. All Rights Reserved.
DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000007075

www.ccmjournal.org     1

Prescott et al

respiratory support; adjunctive and additional therapies; and goals of care,
transitions of care, and long-term outcomes, as well as a usability workgroup
that developed material to support dissemination and uptake of the guidelines.
Each subgroup had at least one panelist currently practicing in a LMIC.

Elie Azoulay, MD39

Evidence Synthesis

Bin Du, MD46

The process for selecting PICO questions and completing evidence synthesis
is detailed in Supplemental Digital Content 1 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H904). Prioritized patient-centered outcomes were selected a priori for each
question. PICO questions addressed in this guideline update are presented in
Supplemental Digital Content 2 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H905).
Evidence synthesis followed the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) methodology. Evidence profiles for
each PICO question are presented in Supplemental Digital Content 3 (https://
links.lww.com/CCM/H906), Supplemental Digital Content 4 (https://links.
lww.com/CCM/H907), Supplemental Digital Content 5 (https://links.lww.
com/CCM/H908), Supplemental Digital Content 6 (https://links.lww.com/
CCM/H909), Supplemental Digital Content 7 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H910), and Supplemental Digital Content 8 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H911). The certainty of evidence was graded as high, medium, low, or very low
according to GRADE methodology. We used the Evidence to Decision (EtD)
framework (9) to support consistent, transparent, and structured formulation
of statements across the guideline. The EtD framework considers the balance
of effects, the certainty of evidence, as well as patient values, resource intensity,
equity, and cost effectiveness (9). The EtD summary of judgements for each
PICO question is presented in Supplemental Digital Content 3 (https://links.
lww.com/CCM/H906), Supplemental Digital Content 4 (https://links.lww.
com/CCM/H907), Supplemental Digital Content 5 (https://links.lww.com/
CCM/H908), Supplemental Digital Content 6 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H909), Supplemental Digital Content 7 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H910),
and Supplemental Digital Content 8 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H911). We
used standardized language to summarize the findings of evidence syntheses
based on effect size (i.e., point estimate) and certainty of the evidence, as recommended by GRADE methodology (10).

Marie-Carmelle Elie-Turenne, MD48,49

Maurizio Cecconi, MD40,41
Pauline F. Convocar, MD, MCHM42,43,44
Gennaro De Pascale, MD3,4
Kent Doi, MD, PhD45
Moritoki Egi, MD47
Ricard Ferrer, MD, PhD50,51
Alison Fox-Robichaud, MD52,53
Craig French, MBBS24,54
Yonathan Freund, MD, PhD55,56
Michelle Ng Gong, MD, MS57
Caleb P. Hale, MD58
Naomi E. Hammond, RN, BN, MN
(Crit.Care), MPH, PhD59,60
Madiha Hashmi, MD, FFARCSI61
Leo Heunks, MD, PhD62
Theodore J. Iwashyna, MD, PhD63,64
Shevin T. Jacob, MD, MPH65,66
Michael Klompas, MD, MPH67,68
Arthur Kwizera, MD69
Murdoch Leeies, MD70,71
Joanna D. Lejnieks, RN72
Mitchell M. Levy, MD73
Flavia R. Machado, MD, PhD74
Marcelo O. Maia, MD75,76,77
Henry Masur, MD78
Ryan C. Maves, MD79,80
Steven McGloughlin, MD25,81
Joanne McPeake, PhD, MSc, BN
(Hons), RGN82
Nicholas M. Mohr, MD, MS83,84,85
Sheila Nainan Myatra, MD86
Marlies Ostermann, MD, PhD87,88
Sandra L. Peake, MD, PhD,
FCICM89,90,91
Mathias W. Pletz, MD92,93
Jason A. Roberts, PhD94,95,96

Process for Determining the Type of Statement
Figure 1 summarizes the stepwise process we used to determine the type of
statement for each PICO question. In contrast to many other guidelines, we always provided a graded recommendation when there was at least low certainty
evidence to inform a recommendation. For most PICO questions, we relied
most heavily on the balance of desirable and undesirable effects to inform recommendations. However, when the balance of effects was equivalent, we relied
on other domains in the EtD framework to determine the type of recommendation and used “either/or” statements when the balance of all EtD domains
for two different approaches or therapies were equivalent. However, for PICOs
where the comparator was usual care alone, we used the language of “we make
no recommendation due to equal balance of effects” since suggestions to use or
2     www.ccmjournal.org

Regis G. Rosa, MD97,98,99
Robert G. Sawyer, MD100
Christa A. Schorr, RN, DNP101,102
Steven Q. Simpson, MD103
Li Weng, MD104
W. Joost Wiersinga, MD, PhD,
MBA105,106,107
Andrew Rhodes, MBBS, MD108
Craig M. Coopersmith, MD109

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

TABLE 1.

Table of Statements

(Continued)

Critical Care Medicine

www.ccmjournal.org     3

Prescott et al

TABLE 1, continued

(Continued)

4     www.ccmjournal.org

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

TABLE 1, continued

(Continued)

Critical Care Medicine

www.ccmjournal.org     5

Prescott et al

TABLE 1, continued

(Continued)

6     www.ccmjournal.org

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

TABLE 1, continued

(Continued)

Critical Care Medicine

www.ccmjournal.org     7

Prescott et al

TABLE 1, continued

(Continued)

8     www.ccmjournal.org

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

TABLE 1, continued

(Continued)

Critical Care Medicine

www.ccmjournal.org     9

Prescott et al

TABLE 1, continued

not use a particular therapy were viewed as potentially
confusing and unhelpful.
Types of Graded Recommendations
Using the GRADE approach, we classified each graded
recommendation as either “strong” or “conditional”
(referred to as “weak” recommendations in prior SSC
guidelines). We used the language “we recommend”
for strong recommendations and “we suggest” for conditional recommendations, consistent with GRADE
guidance.
10     www.ccmjournal.org

Implications of Graded Recommendations
A strong recommendation indicates that most, if not
all, individuals in the relevant clinical situation should
receive, or avoid, the intervention. In contrast, a conditional recommendation acknowledges that the balance
between desirable and undesirable may vary depending on patient values, clinical circumstances, or resource availability. Conditional recommendations may
not be universally implementable and are less likely to
be suitable for rigid performance metrics or enforcement. Flexibility and local context should guide their
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

Figure 1. Process for selecting the type of statement.

TABLE 2.

Implications of Strong Vs. Conditional Recommendations
Stakeholder

Strong Recommendation

Conditional Recommendation

Patients and
families

All or most would want the intervention.

Most would want the intervention, but a
substantial proportion would not.

Clinicians

The intervention should be given to all or most patients.
There is little need for shared decision-making for tailoring to context.

The intervention should be done for most patients,
but clinicians should consider shared
decision-making, clinical context, and resources.

Policy makers

Often more appropriate for policy or performance
measure.

May be less appropriate for policy or performance
measure.

Researchers

Research resources are better spent on other topics.

Additional research may be warranted and may
change future recommendations.

adaptation into policy. Further details on implication
of strong vs. conditional recommendations are presented in Table 2 and Supplemental Digital Content 1
(https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904).
Good Practice Statements
We followed the GRADE guidance to identify statements that were better classified as good practice
statements (previously referred to as “best practice
statements” in prior SSC guidelines (11, 12). These
Critical Care Medicine

statements represented guidance that did not rely on
a formal evidence profile. We used this classification
in situations where generating high-certainty evidence
was infeasible. To qualify as a good practice statement,
a recommendation had to meet all of the following
criteria: 1) it was clear and actionable, 2) it addressed
a necessary practice, 3) the net benefit (or harm) was
unequivocal, 4) the evidence was difficult or inappropriate to summarize quantitatively, 5) the rationale was
explicit, and 6) GRADE methods were not suitable to
formally assess certainty of evidence.
www.ccmjournal.org     11

Prescott et al

Remarks
Formal remarks were included to provide additional
context when the statement alone could not fully capture important considerations influencing the recommendation. Remarks were used to clarify or qualify
recommendations—often in situations where the evidence was weak, conflicting, or incomplete.
In Our Practice Statements
We decided a priori to include “In Our Practice” statements describing the panel’s practice in areas where
evidence was insufficient to support a formal recommendation or where evidence was assessed as low or very
low certainty and the panel determined that an “in our
practice” statement would be helpful to end-users of the
guideline. In our practice statements are not guidance
or endorsement of a specific intervention. Instead, they
document how panelists currently approach situations
characterized by uncertainty, absence of data, or contextspecific clinical variability. The goal of these statements
is to provide some information on current practice even
when rigorous evidence is lacking.
Carryover Statements
We retained several statements from the 2021 SSC
guidelines that remain clinically relevant, accurate,
and essential to comprehensive sepsis care. These statements typically addressed topics without significant
new evidence or where further research was unlikely
to alter prior SSC guidance. These carryover statements did not undergo updated evidence synthesis, as
they were deemed unlikely to have sufficient new evidence to warrant a change in guidance based on the
panels’ knowledge of the literature. However, the panel

reviewed and voted for each carryover statement for
continued relevance and accuracy.
Consensus Voting
We required a minimum 75% response rate and at least
80% agreement among eligible panelists to finalize a
recommendation (and associated formal remarks). For
new or updated statements that did not meet the consensus threshold on the first vote, we allowed two additional rounds of voting to reach consensus. Between
rounds, statements were refined based on panel feedback before revoting. Carryover statements were
allowed just one round of voting. We achieved a greater
than 98% response rate for each round of voting.
Sepsis Terminology
These guidelines define sepsis as life-threatening acute
organ dysfunction due to infection, and septic shock
as a subset of patients with circulatory dysfunction that
confers a higher risk of mortality, consistent with the
third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis
and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3) (1). In clinical practice, diagnosis of sepsis and septic shock should be based on
holistic clinical assessment, which may vary across settings depending on local resources such as laboratory
testing availability. The recommendations in the SSC
guidelines are intended to be applied pragmatically to
patients diagnosed with sepsis and septic shock according to local practice. Furthermore, we did not restrict literature searches or evidence syntheses to studies using
the Sepsis-3 definition, as studies using prior sepsis definitions are still informative to current practice.
Because the diagnosis of sepsis may be uncertain in
clinical practice, we developed standardized language for
definite, probable, possible, and unlikely sepsis, which
are used throughout the SSC guidelines (Table 3).

TABLE 3.

Sepsis Terminology in This Guideline
Definite sepsis

Sepsis is confirmed based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing. An alternative diagnosis
is very unlikely.

Probable sepsis

High suspicion for sepsis. Sepsis is the most likely diagnosis based on history, clinical examination, and
diagnostic testing. An alternative diagnosis is less likely.

Possible sepsis

Moderate suspicion for sepsis. Sepsis is a possible diagnosis; however, an alternative diagnosis is also
likely based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing.

Unlikely sepsis

Low suspicion for sepsis. Clinical assessment is not consistent with sepsis, or an alternate diagnosis is
more likely based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing.

12     www.ccmjournal.org

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

SCREENING AND EARLY MANAGEMENT
Performance Improvement Programs
1. For hospitals and health
New (sepsis quality
systems, we “recommend”
improvement);
using a performance
Carried over
improvement program for
(performance
sepsis, including sepsis
improvement program
screening for acutely ill,
with screening and
high-risk patients; standard
standard operating
operating procedures for
procedures).
treatment; and implementation
of sepsis quality improvement
strategies.
(strong recommendation,
moderate certainty evidence
for screening)
(strong recommendation, very low
certainty evidence for standard
operating procedures)
(strong recommendation,
moderate certainty evidence for
quality improvement strategies)
Remark: Performance
improvement programs and
quality improvement strategies
may vary by setting and in
accordance with a hospital/
healthcare system’s ability to
implement.

The recommendations for sepsis screening and
standard operating procedures were carried over, so
did not undergo formal updated evidence synthesis.
However, several relevant randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) have been published since the 2021 SSC guidelines, further supporting these recommendations.
One RCT with 872 patients evaluated hour-1 bundle
implementation in the emergency department and
showed this standard operating procedure was associated with shorter time to antibiotics (73 min sooner;
95% CI, 93–53 min sooner) and an uncertain effect on
mortality with a point estimate suggesting a possible
large decrease (adjusted risk ratio [aRR] 0.81; 95% CI,
0.48–1.39) (13). Second, in the large stepped-wedge,
cluster RCT SCREEN evaluating 60,055 patients, implementation of an electronic alert system, staff education, and feedback was associated with lower 90-day
in-hospital mortality in patients with and without
sepsis (aRR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.77–0.93) (14).
The recommendation for using quality improvement
(QI) strategies was newly added. QI is a systematic and
Critical Care Medicine

ongoing effort to improve evidence-based care processes, such as timely antibiotic administration, with
the aim of improving clinical outcomes. QI strategies represent a potentially scalable intervention for
improving systems performance and patient care. In a
meta-analysis of 50 observational studies, sepsis QI initiatives were associated with improved delivery of recommended care practices and reduced mortality (odds
ratio [OR] 0.66; 95% CI, 0.61–0.72) (15). Furthermore,
multiple before-and-after and differences-indifferences studies have shown improvements in both
processes of care and clinical outcomes in hospitals
participating in multi-hospital sepsis QI initiatives
(16–18). Although most studies evaluating the impact
of QI initiatives are observational, we identified one recent RCT testing a QI intervention involving the display of a sepsis early warning system-triggered flag in
the electronic health record combined with electronic
health record-based emergency department pharmacist notification (19). Patients randomized to this QI
intervention had shorter time to antimicrobial therapy
(2.3 vs. 3.0 hr, p = 0.04) and increased days alive and
out of hospital at 28 days (median, 24.1 vs. 22.5 d, p =
0.01) (19).
The panel considered the balance of effects, costs,
and feasibility, and judged that the desirable effects
of QI interventions to probably outweigh undesirable
effects in most settings. Our recommendation for using
a performance improvement program for sepsis incorporating screening, standard operating procedures,
and QI strategies is consistent with the U.S. Centers’
for Disease Control and Prevention’s Hospital Sepsis
Program Core Elements guidance (20, 21). The Core
Elements summarize key features of effective hospital
or health system performance improvement programs
for sepsis (20, 21). Recent surveys suggest opportunities for improvement in hospital sepsis programs, to
support delivery of evidence-based management (22–
24). Most studies were conducted in high resource settings, but QI initiatives—particularly those focused
on sepsis bundle element adherence and data feedback—may be applicable in resource-limited settings
with appropriate contextual adaptation. However, it is
important to start with an understanding of the system
and the particular constraints that limit the quality of
sepsis care. Furthermore, future research should clarify
which QI elements drive observed effects and how best
to sustain improvements.
www.ccmjournal.org     13

Prescott et al

In conclusion, QI initiatives likely improve sepsis
processes of care and may have small effects on mortality. They are recommended as part of a systemsbased approach to improving sepsis management.
Further, the integration of a performance improvement program for sepsis, including screening of highrisk patients and standardized treatment protocols,
within existing antibiotic stewardship programs can
enhance overall patient outcomes and optimize antimicrobial use (25).
Implementation Strategies
2. For hospitals and health systems, we “suggest”
New
using a “code sepsis” or “sepsis huddle” protocol
over not using such a protocol.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)
Remark: “Code sepsis” or “sepsis huddle” protocols
involve a multidisciplinary team huddle at bedside
to discuss and expedite sepsis diagnosis and
treatment following a positive sepsis screen.

“Code sepsis” is a multidisciplinary-driven process of
care that aims to expedite the diagnosis and treatment
of sepsis. While code sepsis protocols vary, common
elements include a screening tool for tracking clinical
indicators of sepsis, a trigger mechanism for alert activation for suspected sepsis by either a bedside clinician or
an automated algorithm, and a response team that will
provide immediate bedside evaluation and treatment
(26–29). Composition of the response teams varies
widely. For example, the response team may be a dedicated multidisciplinary sepsis response team, a general
rapid response team with expertise in sepsis, or an ad
hoc team of individuals already involved in the patient’s
care (e.g., nurse, physician, pharmacist, unit manager).
Likewise, the process of screening for sepsis and activating a code sepsis response varies, and may involve
manual screening, automating screening, or proactive
rounding. Finally, the implementation of sepsis evaluation and treatment varies and may include fast-track
protocols, algorithms, or checklists. As with rapid response systems, code sepsis implementation requires an
institutional commitment and designated leadership to
oversee its performance and effectiveness (26).
Multiple interventional and observational studies
with global representation investigating “code sepsis”
were identified with mixed results in qualitative review. Several studies reported improved processes and
14     www.ccmjournal.org

outcome of care with the intervention, including lower
mortality (26–28, 30–34), reduced odds of mechanical ventilation (26, 28), shorter time to administration of antibiotics (29, 32, 35–42) and fluids (37, 40,
42–44), lower proportion of patients receiving vasopressors (43), and earlier escalation of care (33, 37, 45).
Furthermore, in a large stepped-wedge, cluster randomized trial evaluating 60,055 patients, implementation of an electronic alert system, staff education, and
feedback was associated with lower 90-day in-hospital
mortality in patients with and without sepsis (aRR
0.85; 95% CI, 0.77–0.93) (14). Meanwhile, some studies showed no difference in time to sepsis recognition
(41, 46), administration of antibiotics (19, 31, 43–45,
47, 48), fluid resuscitation (41), escalation of care (19,
27, 42, 48, 49), use of vasopressors (26), and mortality
(19, 29, 36–39, 42, 43, 48, 49).
Overall, the panel assessed that the balance of evidence favored implementation of a multidisciplinary
“code sepsis” response to improve outcomes in patients
with sepsis. The benefit also extends to patients not
found to have sepsis by mitigating morbidity and
mortality through early identification of patients at
risk for clinical deterioration and worse outcomes.
Implementing a “code sepsis” protocol may be possible
in most settings, by leveraging existing staff and existing rapid response systems. A recent study on sepsis
management in 66 hospitals in 24 LMICs identified
nearly one-third (28%) used an ICU outreach service
(50), which could potentially be used for a code sepsis
response team. Therefore, the panel issued a conditional recommendation for the use of a multidisciplinary “code sepsis” response for sepsis care. The benefit
of implementing a code sepsis protocol likely varies
across hospitals and health systems depending on the
quality of usual care; it may provide more benefit in
settings with less robust infrastructure for sepsis recognition and treatment, but relatively less incremental
benefit in settings that already have robust systems in
place to rapidly identify and treat sepsis.
Screening for Sepsis En Route to Hospital
3. In acutely ill adults en route to hospital by
ambulance or flight, we “suggest” using a
standard sepsis screening tool over not using a
screening tool.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

New

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

Sepsis treatment is time-sensitive, and for the onehalf of sepsis patients transported to hospitals by
ambulance, the prehospital period is opportune to
identify sepsis and initiate hospital notification and
treatment (51–53). Using prehospital sepsis screening tools to identify patients at high risk for sepsis
and sepsis-related death could shorten time to treatment and improve clinical outcomes. Prehospital
notification has improved timeliness of care in other
acute care conditions, and diagnostic momentum
initiated through ambulance screening and prearrival notification can improve sepsis performance
(54, 55).
In a scoping review and a separate systematic review
of prehospital sepsis screening tools, all had moderate
ability to identify patients with sepsis in the prehospital environment (56–58). In a comparative study of
221,429 prehospital medical records that calculated
the following early warning scores: National Early
Warning Score (NEWS), National Early Warning
Score 2 (NEWS2), Modified Early Warning Score
(MEWS), systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS), and quick sepsis-related organ failure assessment (qSOFA), NEWS2 had the best absolute test performance (sensitivity 73.1%; 95% CI, 71.8–74.4%; area
under receiver operating curve [AUC] 0.77; 95% CI,
0.71–0.83) of studied screening tools. However, due
to the lower specificity (81.6%, 95% CI, 80.4–82.7%),
high rate of false-positive screens (positive predictive value 6.5%, 95% CI, 5.8–7.3%), and perceived
difficulty of use in the prehospital environment, the
panel refrained from recommending a specific screening tool (59). qSOFA score had the lowest prehospital
sepsis sensitivity (23.1%, 95% CI, 21.8–24.3%) (59).
These findings largely align with the test characteristics
of these tools in the emergency department, suggesting
that standardized screening can improve early sepsis
recognition (60).
Several single-center studies evaluated the impact
of implementing prehospital sepsis notification on
process and clinical outcomes. Three of these studies
showed that time-to-treatment on sepsis quality measures or time-to-antibiotics were shorter with prehospital sepsis notification, but only one study reported a
reduction in sepsis mortality (44, 61–63).
Based on available evidence, the panel determined
that the balance of effects probably favors prehospital ambulance-based sepsis screening for identifying
Critical Care Medicine

patients with sepsis and improving the timeliness of
sepsis care. Screening is likely most effective when it is
combined with standard hospital prenotification pathways and emergency department-based procedures
to facilitate rapid evaluation, risk stratification, and
treatment.
The use of a prehospital screening tool is likely
feasible and adaptable in all geographic settings and
should be a research priority in low resource settings.
Screening for Sepsis in Hospital
4. For acutely ill patients in hospital, we
Revisited
“recommend” using NEWS, NEW2, MEWS,
or SIRS over qSOFA as a single tool to
screen for sepsis.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty
evidence)

The Third International Consensus Conference on the
Definitions of Sepsis (Sepsis-3) identified qSOFA as a
predictor of death or prolonged ICU stay in patients
with known or suspected infection, but no analysis
had been performed at that time to support its use
as a screening tool (1, 64). The 2021 SSC Guidelines
recommended against qSOFA as a sole sepsis screening tool (65, 66). Since then, numerous studies have
investigated its use as a screening tool, with consistent
findings (67–69). Four systematic reviews and metaanalyses have reported that Early Warning Scores
(EWS), including NEWS, NEWS2, MEWS, and SIRS
were more sensitive for the diagnosis of sepsis than
qSOFA (70–73). Similar findings have been reported
in an LMIC (74).
There is no ideal tool to screen for sepsis that has both
high sensitivity and specificity. Screening tools should
have high sensitivity to limit the number of false negative results. A large cohort study of over 221,000 patients
demonstrated NEWS2 had the greatest sensitivity and
specificity compared with MEWS, SIRS, and qSOFA
(59). EWS were designed to identify patients at risk of
clinical deterioration from a variety of causes, and as
such, they perform well in assisting with the identification of sepsis. Bedside clinicians need to understand
the limitations of each tool. The presence of a positive
qSOFA should alert clinicians to the possibility of sepsis
in all resource settings but given qSOFA’s poor sensitivity
for the diagnosis of sepsis, the panel issued a strong recommendation in favor of using NEWS, NEW2, MEWS,
www.ccmjournal.org     15

Prescott et al

or SIRS over qSOFA as a single screening tool. However,
a recently published stepped wedge trial showed that
electronic qSOFA screening with activation of an alert
system triggering subsequent nurse and physician assessment and interventions resulted in improved 90-day
in-hospital mortality (14). This benefit extended to nonseptic patients as well (14). This shows that qSOFA, while
having a lower sensitivity for sepsis that other tools, is
still useful for detecting clinical deterioration.
The use of artificial intelligence (AI) is receiving increasing attention as a tool for early screening and prediction of
sepsis (75, 76). Future research may inform practice in this
area and should involve comparative studies.
Biomarkers and Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Sepsis
5. Sepsis is a clinical diagnosis and should not be
ruled in or ruled out using a single biomarker or
diagnostic test.
(good practice statement)

New

6. There is “insufficient evidence” to make a
recommendation regarding use of novel rapid
host response diagnostics.

New

Several novel host response diagnostic tests are approved
by regulatory bodies and available as diagnostic aids for
sepsis. Sepsis can be straightforward to diagnose when infection is obvious and organ dysfunction is clearly related;
however, diagnosis can be difficult when infection is unconfirmed and there may be alternative causes for acute
organ dysfunction. Newer sepsis diagnostic tests aim to
categorize patients with suspected sepsis into risk categories, for example, low, medium, and high.
Sepsis diagnostic tests use several approaches to
assess the likelihood of sepsis. Some tests use WBC
characteristics, for example, monocyte distribution
width (MDW) and IntelliSep, which evaluate size
characteristics of circulating monocytes and deformability of neutrophils, respectively (77–80). SeptiCyte
Rapid and TriVerity assess messenger RNA transcripts
that are associated with infection and sepsis (81, 82).
TriVerity also seeks to distinguish viral vs. bacterial infection (82). Sepsis ImmunoScore uses AI to combine
electronic health record data with specific biomarker
and cytokine measurements (83). Additional tests
assess individual serum biomarkers such as pancreatic
stone protein to assess risk of sepsis (84).
None of these novel host response diagnostics provides a “positive” or “negative” result. Instead, they categorize the post-test risk of sepsis into categories, ranging
16     www.ccmjournal.org

from low risk to very high risk. However, the post-test
likelihood ratios for sepsis associated with those categories are not uniform from one test to another, and
clinicians should familiarize themselves with an individual test’s characteristics before using it. None of the
tests should be considered definitive; all should be used
in combination with a full clinical evaluation. Except for
MDW, clinicians must suspect sepsis before ordering
the test. MDW, once activated on the appropriate hematological analyzer, is available for all complete blood
counts with leukocyte differential. Thus, increased
MDW values could prompt the re-evaluation of patients
with non-classical presenting features, specifically to reassess for sepsis. Finally, in patients with clear sepsis at
presentation, for example, those with greater than 90%
probability of sepsis after initial evaluation, the tests add
little diagnostic or confirmatory value.
Each of these novel host response diagnostics is
designed to help clinicians to assess a patient’s likelihood of having or developing sepsis with potentially
greater accuracy than standard clinical evaluation, especially for patients with non-classic presentations.
Improved diagnostic accuracy may result in better patient outcomes; however, no studies have assessed the
clinical outcomes of a diagnostic strategy incorporating these tests. Due to the costs of these diagnostic aids,
and lack of evidence that they improve patient-centered
outcomes or resource utilization, the panel did not recommend the use of any specific sepsis diagnostic aids.
Studies evaluating the impact of diagnostic aids on patient outcomes and resource utilization are a research
priority. Thus, it is reasonable for health systems and
clinicians make use of these novel host response diagnostics when feasible, whereas studying their impact
on patient outcomes and resource utilization.
Most of these novel host response biomarkers are
not yet available in resource limited settings (85, 86).
Blood Cultures
7. For adults with possible, probable, or definite
sepsis or septic shock, we “recommend”
collecting blood cultures as soon as possible and
ideally before the administration of antimicrobial
therapy.
(strong recommendation, low certainty evidence)

New

Identifying the causative organism in sepsis helps to optimize antimicrobial therapy, ensure that the causative
pathogen is treated, support antimicrobial stewardship,
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

and improve patient outcomes. A pathogen is identified in approximately 60–70% of patients with sepsis,
although blood cultures are positive in only approximately 10–20% of patients (87). There is limited direct
evidence evaluating the clinical benefit of blood culture
testing. However, given the high mortality and morbidity associated with sepsis and the importance of
appropriate antimicrobial coverage, the panel issued
a strong recommendation for collection of blood cultures. Blood cultures should be collected as soon as possible to avoid delay in initiating antimicrobial therapy.
Several factors affect the yield of blood cultures, including the pretest probability of bacteremia, number
of sets collected, the blood volume collected, the use
of anaerobic bottles, and prior antibiotic use (88, 89).
The panel examined multiple guidelines and a recent
scoping review stratifying the probability of bacteremia based on presenting illness, with septic shock
having a greater than or equal to 50% yield (90–94).
Blood cultures are generally obtained from two different sites (91), using 10-mL blood volume per tube (95).
Multi-site collection is often recommended based on
a) the ability to distinguish pathogens from contaminants when using different venipunctures sites and b)
potential increased sensitivity for pathogen detection
with two sets of cultures (e.g., one study showed sensitivity for detecting bacteremia increased from 91.5% to
99.3% when two sets of blood cultures were collected
vs. one [89, 96]). However, 2025 German National
Guidelines (93) recommend collecting blood cultures
from a single site based on a 2025 systematic review
of seven studies (18,901 patients, 24,955 blood culture
samples) that showed single site cultures may result
in a higher proportion of cultures having the recommended 10 mL, improved pathogen detection, less
contamination, and require less venipuncture (89).
The number of blood cultures and the use of anaerobic bottles should be individualized, especially in low
resource settings. A small percentage (approximately
15% of blood cultures with positive growth) show
growth in only anaerobic bottles (97, 98). In most cases,
however, this result does not require a change from empiric antibiotic therapy, as true anaerobic bloodstream
infections usually occur in clinical situations where empiric treatment already includes anaerobic coverage (92,
99, 100). Thus, the use of aerobic bottles alone can be
justified since anaerobic cultures may not confer substantial additional benefit unless anaerobic pathogens
Critical Care Medicine

are highly suspected. In low resource settings, collection
of a single set of blood cultures can be justified based
on the 2025 systematic review showing similar yield between single vs. multiple blood culture sets (89).
Attention to the technical aspects of blood culture
collection is important to limit contamination, unnecessary diagnostic and therapeutic interventions,
and additional costs. Clinicians should be aware that
administration of antimicrobial therapy before blood
culture collection may reduce their yield. In a multicenter study of 325 patients presenting to the emergency department with sepsis-induced hypotension or
hypoperfusion (systolic blood pressure [SBP] < 90 mm
Hg or lactate ≥ 4 mmol/L), blood culture positivity
decreased from 31.4% pre-antimicrobial to 19.4%
at a median 70 minutes (interquartile range [IQR],
50–110 min) post-antimicrobial, a 12.0% absolute reduction and 38.2% relative reduction in blood culture
sensitivity (101). Wherever possible, blood cultures
should be collected before administration of antimicrobial, but should not delay the initiation antimicrobial therapy, particularly in patients with hypotension.
Repeat cultures are recommended to confirm clearance of bacteremia or fungemia for Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus lugdunensis, and Candida species
(92, 102, 103).
Although the PICO question focused specifically
on blood cultures, additional cultures to elucidate the
source of infection should be considered (e.g., peritoneal fluid culture) depending on the suspected site of
infection.
Blood Lactate Measurement
8. For adults with possible, probable, or
definite sepsis or septic shock, we “suggest”
measuring blood lactate.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Carryover

This statement on performance was carried over, please
see the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Initial Fluid Resuscitation
9. Sepsis and septic shock are medical
emergencies; treatment and resuscitation
should begin immediately.
(good practice statement)

Carryover

www.ccmjournal.org     17

Prescott et al

10. For adults with sepsis-induced
Revisited
hypoperfusion or septic shock, we
“suggest” administering at least 30 mL/kg of
IV crystalloid in the first 3 hr.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Consideration should be given to
individual patient characteristics and context
when selecting initial fluid volume.
Remark: Clinicians prescribing fluids should
perform frequent, ongoing reassessment and
closely monitor patients to avoid harms of
under- or over-resuscitation.​
Remark: Weight-based fluid volume should
be calculated based on actual body weight,
or by adjusted or ideal body weight in
patients with body mass index > 30 kg/m2
(Table 4).

Timely, effective fluid resuscitation is crucial for the
stabilization of sepsis-induced tissue hypoperfusion in sepsis and septic shock. As recommended in
previous SSC guidelines, resuscitation should begin
immediately upon recognition of sepsis or septic
shock, and clinicians should have a low threshold
for commencing resuscitation in patients with possible sepsis (65, 66, 104, 105). Although evidence
in support of 30 mL/kg stems from observational
studies and include studies evaluating 30 mL/kg as
part of a bundle of care practices, there are no new
data suggesting a change is needed from prior SSC
guidelines.
Consistent with 2016 and 2021 SSC guidelines, we
suggest administering at least 30 mL/kg of IV crystalloids for initial fluid resuscitation in patients with
sepsis-induced hypoperfusion or septic shock (65, 66,
104, 105). Sepsis-induced hypoperfusion may be identified be hypotension (e.g., MAP < 65 mm Hg, SBP <
90 mm Hg, relative hypotension (e.g., SBP markedly
below known baseline), or elevated lactate. Although
lactate greater than or equal to 4 mmol/L has historically been the threshold for fluid-resuscitation, intermediate lactate elevation (> 2 to < 4 mmol/L) is
common in patients with sepsis; (106) associated with
increased mortality; (106, 107) consistent with lactate
threshold for the Sepsis-3 definitions of septic shock
(> 2 mmol/L); (1, 107) and may also benefit from
fluid-resuscitation to avoid progression to overt hypoperfusion or shock (108). Clinicians should thus consider fluid-resuscitation in patients presenting with
18     www.ccmjournal.org

intermediate lactate elevation, particularly if there are
no contraindications to fluid administration.
The fixed volume of 30 mL/kg is based on observational evidence (16–18, 108), with most studies using
actual body weight. There are no prospective interventional studies comparing different volumes for initial
resuscitation in sepsis or septic shock. A retrospective
analysis of adults presenting to an emergency department with sepsis or septic shock showed that failure
to receive 30 mL/kg of crystalloid fluid therapy within
3 hours of sepsis onset was associated with increased
odds of in-hospital mortality, delayed resolution of
hypotension, and increased ICU length of stay (LOS),
including in patients with end-stage kidney disease
and heart failure (109). An observational study of
612 hospitals in the United States demonstrated a
reduced risk of in-hospital mortality for patients with
sepsis who received moderate volume fluid resuscitation (4.0 L; IQR, 2.4–5.1 L) compared with very low
volume resuscitation (1.6 L; IQR, 1.0–2.5 L) or very
high volume resuscitation (6.1 L; IQR, 4.0–9.0 L) p <
0.01 (110). In the ARISE (111), ProCESS (112), and
PROMISE (113) trials, the average volume of fluid
received pre-randomization was also in the range of
30 mL/kg, suggesting that this fluid volume has been
adopted in routine clinical practice (114). A recent
systematic review and meta-analysis addressing the
effect of early fluid resuscitation on mortality in sepsis
reported that a survival benefit was observed when
30 mL/kg was completed within 3 hours (low certainty) (115).
Due to potential concerns of administering very
large volumes of crystalloid fluid in obese patients, the
panel determined that fluid volumes may be calculated
using adjusted or ideal body weight in patients with
high body mass index (116–118). In low resource settings where the availability of respiratory support may
be limited, the risks of fluid overload are more pronounced, so the clinical context should be considered
when ordering fluid resuscitation (119, 120). However,
prior trials suggesting harm from fluid resuscitation in
low resource settings have generally used volumes far
exceeding 30 mL/kg. For example, in the SSSP-2 trial,
patients randomized to the resuscitation protocol received a median 3.5 L fluid in the first 6 hours (≥ 70 mL/
kg based on weigh inferred from arm circumference)
vs. 2.0L (~50 mL/kg) in the usual care arm (121). It is
important that fluid resuscitation be tailored to actual
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

TABLE 4.

30 mL/kg in Liters, by Weight and Height
Height (m) (feet, inches)
Weigh (kg)
(lb.)

1.5 m (4′11″) 1.7 m (5′7″)

1.9 m (6′3″)

50 (110)

1.5

1.5

1.5

60 (132)

1.8

1.8

1.8

70 (154)

2.1

2.1

2.1

80 (176)

1.9

2.4

2.4

90 (200)

2.0

2.4

2.7

100 (220)

2.1

2.5

3.0

110 (242)

2.2

2.6

3.3

120 (264)

2.3

2.7

3.0

130 (287)

2.5

2.8

3.1

140 (309)

2.6

3.0

3.2

150 (331)

2.7

3.1

3.3

160 (353)

2.8

3.2

3.4

White cells, for patients with body mass index (BMI) ≤ 30 kg/m2
display 30 mL/kg using actual body weight. Italicized values, for
patients with BMI > 30 kg/m2 display 30 mL/kg using adjusted
body weight. Adjusted Body Weight was calculated as Ideal Body
Weight + 0.4*(Actual Body Weight—Adjusted Body Weight),
where Ideal Body Weight was calculated using the Devine formula
(122a) for males.

body weight in cachectic or underweight patients to
avoid over-resuscitation (122). The panel emphasized
the need for clinical reassessment during and following initial fluid resuscitation to reduce the risk of either
under or over-resuscitation.
Table 4 displays 30 mL/kg in liters for patients of
varying heights and weights.
The SSC guidelines’ conditional recommendation to
administer greater than or equal to 30 mL/kg of initial
resuscitation differs from the ESCIM clinical practice
guidelines which “suggest administering up to 30 mL/
kg of IV crystalloids in the initial phase” (123). The
SSC panel acknowledges that fluid volume requirements vary across patients and encourages frequent
reassessment to avoid under- or over-resuscitation.
However, most patients with sepsis-induced hypotension and hypoperfusion benefit from greater than or
equal to 30 mL/kg fluid resuscitation and fluid-related
harms generally occur with far larger volumes (e.g., >
50 mL/kg).
Critical Care Medicine

Timing of Vasopressor Initiation Relative to
Fluid Resuscitation
11. For adults with sepsis-induced hypotension,
we “suggest” initial IV crystalloid fluid bolus
resuscitation followed by vasopressor support if
hypotension persists.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: In patients with unstable septic shock,
immediate concurrent administration of
vasopressors together with IV crystalloid fluid may
be warranted on a case-by-case basis. Presence
of unstable shock should be determined by
physical examination. Suggestive clinical features
of unstable shock include severely reduced
blood pressure, mottled skin, ashen appearance,
cyanosis/decreased oxygen saturation,
tachycardia, and altered mentation.

New

Sepsis-induced hypotension is a critical condition
that requires prompt and appropriate intervention to
restore perfusion and the mitigate risk of end-organ
damage. The timing of vasopressor initiation—either
immediately, concomitantly with, or after fluid resuscitation—remains a topic of debate. The rationale for
earlier vasopressor initiation in septic shock includes
faster restoration of blood pressure and prevention of
fluid overload (124, 125). Persistent hypotension is associated with worse outcomes in observational studies
(126).
Recent studies provide mixed evidence on the timing of vasopressor administration in sepsis-induced
hypotension. Four relevant systematic reviews and
meta-analyses were identified (124, 127–129). Two
small, single-center RCTs suggest that early administration of fixed, low-dose norepinephrine is associated with reduced fluid requirements and lower
short-term mortality (125, 130). However, these
trials were limited by a prolonged time to shock
resolution, several hours in both arms (125, 130).
Nonetheless, the findings of these trials were similar to observational studies suggesting that early
vasopressor use may be associated with lower mortality (131, 132). The multicenter CLOVERS RCT,
however, found no difference in 90-day mortality,
organ support-free days, or receipt of invasive ventilation between resuscitation algorithms with early
vs. delayed vasopressor initiation (133). Recent observational studies have indicated that peripheral
administration of vasopressors is both feasible and
www.ccmjournal.org     19

Prescott et al

safe (134, 135), so early vasopressor administration
is adaptable to all settings.
The panel based its recommendations on a careful
review of available evidence, balancing the potential
benefits of early vasopressor administration in patients
with life-threatening end-organ hypoperfusion against
the lack of clear evidence supporting its use in all
patients, as well as the potential harms of unnecessary
catecholamine exposure in patients whose hypotension could be rapidly corrected with fluid resuscitation.
It is important to note that studies often exclude
patients with severe comorbidities or in critical states,
which may limit the generalizability of available evidence. Furthermore, most studies did not account for
local variations in sepsis care practices, which may
affect outcomes.
Further multicenter RCTs with larger sample sizes
are needed to confirm the optimal timing for vasopressor initiation in sepsis-induced hypotension. There
are currently 5 geographically diverse RCTs underway,
the results of which are likely to provide further evidence on the subject: NCT05179499, NCT04569942,
NCT06709573, NCT05836272, NCT05931601.
Route of Vasopressor Administration
12. In adults with septic shock, we “suggest”
starting vasopressors peripherally to restore
mean arterial pressure rather than delaying
initiation until central venous access is
secured.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Data are insufficient to recommend a
duration of use, dose, or access route (size
of peripheral IV line or anatomic location).
Midline catheters were not considered.

Revisited

Traditionally, vasopressors were administered exclusively through central venous catheters out of concern
for tissue necrosis associated with extravasation from
peripheral IV lines (136). Recent data suggest that
clinicians (137) and hospital policies (138) are more
comfortable with peripheral vasopressor administration than with delayed initiation of vasopressors if no
central access is present.
The panel considered one RCT (139) of 263 general
ICU patients (of whom 70% required vasopressors)
randomized to immediate central venous catheter
placement vs. no catheter placement, which found an
20     www.ccmjournal.org

uncertain effect on mortality (hazard ratio [HR] 1.30;
95% CI, 0.84–2.01, very low certainty evidence). We
also considered observational studies which, when
evaluated via meta-analysis, found an uncertain effect
on mortality with peripheral vasopressor administration (two studies [139, 140] with 611 patients, 28-day
mortality aRR: 0.85; 95% CI, 0.63–1.14; 3 studies [141–
143] with 1,868 patients, 90-day mortality aRR: 0.89;
95% CI, 0.73–1.08; both very low certainty). Across
seven studies (139, 141–146) (1657 patients), the
pooled complication rate for peripheral vasopressor
administration was 5.97% (95% CI 1.17–14.09%, very
low certainty).
The panel determined that balance of effects and
resource use probably favors initial peripheral vasopressor administration; however, evidence certainty
was very low. Thus, we suggest starting vasopressors
peripherally to restore arterial blood pressure rather
than delaying initiation until central venous access
is secured, in line with the 2021 SSC guidelines (65,
66). Existing studies demonstrating safety of peripheral vasopressor administration generally occurred in
the setting of a safety protocol to ensure the peripheral
IV was high quality, monitor frequently for extravasation, and treat extravasation when present, but the
specific details of safety protocols vary (147). In low
resource settings where frequent monitoring for adequacy of peripheral IVs and presence of extravasation
is not feasible, peripheral vasopressors should be used
with caution.
Future studies are needed to inform the optimal
safety protocols for using peripheral vasopressors, including the safe duration of peripheral vasopressor use,
specific vasopressor medications and maximal doses,
peripheral IV access size, and peripheral IV anatomic
location. Further, understanding the efficacy and safety
of midline catheters (148) to administer vasopressors
in adult septic shock is a research priority.
“In our practice,” 86.6% of panel members use peripheral vasopressors on at least some occasions. Of
these panel members, 12.1% do so only until central
access can be placed. Nearly one-half (46.6%) use peripheral vasopressors for up to 6 hours, 13.8% use them
for up to 24 hours, and 27.6% do not have a set duration
for use. Vasopressor dose (79.3% of panel members),
peripheral access site (70.7%), and specific vasopressor
(48.3%) are common factors influencing panel members’ decision to switch to central access; some panel
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

members also consider clinical trajectory, number of
vasopressors, additional indications for central access,
and availability of central access supplies when deciding to transition to central administration.
Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP) Targets
13. For adults with septic shock, we
Carryover
“recommend” an initial MAP target of 65 mm
with
Hg over higher MAP targets.
new
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty
remark
evidence)
Remark: In practice, it is not feasible to maintain
MAP at exactly 65 mm Hg, so a reasonable
range (e.g., within 5 mm Hg) should be used.
Vasopressors should be titrated to maintain
MAP within this range.
14. For adults with septic shock 65 years old or New
older, we “suggest” an initial MAP range of
60–65 mm Hg over higher ranges.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Mean arterial pressure (MAP) is a key determinant
of mean systemic filling pressure, which in turn is a
major driver of venous return and cardiac output.
Increasing MAP therefore usually results in increased
blood flow and augments the supply side of tissue perfusion. Although some organs, such as the brain and
kidneys can auto-regulate blood flow, MAPs below
a threshold, often understood to be approximately
60 mm Hg, are associated with decreased organ perfusion, which tracks linearly with MAP (149, 150).
The 2021 SSC guidelines recommended targeting
an MAP of 65 mm Hg or higher for initial resuscitation (65, 66). The recommendation was based principally on an RCT in septic shock comparing patients
who were prescribed vasopressors to target a MAP of
65–70 mm Hg, vs a target of 80–85 mm Hg (151). This
trial found no difference in mortality between arms,
although a subgroup analysis demonstrated a 10.5%
absolute reduction in renal replacement therapy (RRT)
with higher MAP targets among patients with chronic
hypertension. However, targeting a higher MAP with
vasopressors was associated with a higher risk of atrial
fibrillation. A limitation of this trial was that the average MAP in both arms exceeded the targeted range.
A meta-analysis of two RCTs indicated that higher
MAP targets may result in little to no difference
in short-term mortality in septic shock (RR, 1.05;
95% CI, 0.90–1.23, low certainty) (152). The 65 trial
Critical Care Medicine

subsequently compared “permissive hypotension”
(MAP 60–65 mm Hg) to “usual care” in patients 65
years old and older with distributive shock (153). The
intervention arm achieved a mean MAP of 67 mm Hg,
compared with 73 mm Hg in the usual care arm (153).
Among 2463 patients analyzed, there was less exposure
to vasopressors in the intervention arm, measured by
duration of vasopressor infusion and total vasopressor
dosing (153). Ninety-day mortality in the permissive
hypotension vs. usual care arm was similar (41.0% vs.
43.8%). An individual patient level meta-analysis that
included this trial and two others reported a point estimate for mortality that suggested benefit with a lower
blood pressure target compared with a higher target,
but the CI did not exclude the possibility of harm
(RR 0.93; 95% CI, 0.76–1.07, low certainty) (154).
In a meta-analysis done for the guidelines limited to
patients 65 years old or older, a lower blood pressure
target was associated with reduced mortality at longest
follow-up (RR 0.89, 95% CI, 0.81–0.98, high certainty).
An open-label trial of 518 patients 65 years old or older
randomized to a lower BP target (MAP 65–70 mm Hg)
compared with a higher BP target (MAP 80–85 mm
Hg) was published after the guidelines meta-analysis
was completed (155). This trial reported increased
mortality associated with the higher MAP target.
In the absence of data to support a higher MAP
target, the panel continues to recommend an initial
MAP target of 65 mm Hg over higher MAP targets
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty evidence) and makes a new conditional recommendation
for an initial MAP target of 60–65 mm Hg over higher
targets in adults 65 years old or older (conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence) in the setting
of new evidence suggesting potential benefit of a lower
MAP target (153, 154).
There is a paucity of evidence from low resource settings; however, implementation of these recommendations is likely to be feasible in all settings (156).
Admission to Intensive Care
15. For adults with sepsis or septic shock
who require ICU admission, we “suggest”
admitting the patients to the ICU within 6 hr.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Carryover

This statement on performance was carried over, see
the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
www.ccmjournal.org     21

Prescott et al

INFECTION
Timing of Antibiotic Initiation in Hospital
16. For adults with possible, probable, or
definite septic shock, we “recommend”
administering antimicrobial therapy
immediately, ideally within 1 hr of
recognition.
(strong recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

Revisited

17. For adults with probable or definite sepsis Revisited
without shock, we “recommend” administering antimicrobial therapy immediately, ideally
within 1 hr of recognition.
(strong recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
18. For adults with possible sepsis without
Revisited
shock, we “suggest” a time-limited course
of rapid investigation and if concern for
infection persists, the administration of
antimicrobial therapy within 3 hours from the
time when sepsis was first suspected.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
19. Clinicians should perform a rapid assess- Revisited
ment of the likelihood of infectious vs. noninfectious causes of acute illness in adults
with possible sepsis without shock.
(good practice statement)
20. For adults with a low likelihood of infection Revisited
and without shock, we “suggest” deferring
antimicrobial therapy while continuing to
closely monitor the patient.
(conditional recommendation, very low
certainty of evidence)

Early administration of appropriate antimicrobial
therapy is the most effective initial intervention to reduce mortality in patients with sepsis or septic shock,
along with fluid resuscitation (157–159). Delivering
antimicrobial therapy to patients with sepsis or
septic shock should therefore be treated as an emergency. This may include newly initiating antimicrobial therapy or broadening antimicrobial therapy in
a patient who decompensates while being treated for
infection. The imperative to administer appropriate
antimicrobial therapy as early as possible, however,
must be balanced against the potential undesirable
effects of unnecessary antimicrobial use in patients
without infection (160, 161), including antimicrobial resistance, disruption to the microbiome (162),
and other antibiotic-associated adverse events (163).
22     www.ccmjournal.org

Consideration of unnecessary antimicrobial exposure
is warranted since approximately 10–30% of patients
initially treated for sepsis have a final diagnosis of
noninfectious or non-bacterial conditions (164–168).
However, simultaneous improvement in timing of
antimicrobial delivery for sepsis and antimicrobial
stewardship are possible (169). Evaluating the likelihood of infection (Table 3) and severity of illness for
each patient with suspected sepsis should inform the
necessity and urgency of antimicrobial therapy (160,
161) (Fig. 2).
We identified a systematic review and metaanalysis which included 42 observational studies
through May 22, 2022 comprising 190,896 patients
(170). We combined the data from this meta-analysis
with two additional observational studies published
after May 22, 2022 (171, 172) and two RCTs (13, 173).
Overall, early antimicrobial therapy was associated
with a reduction in short-term mortality for adults
with sepsis or septic shock, including patients who received antibiotics within 1 hour (vs. longer), 3 hours
(vs. longer), and 6 hours (vs. longer) from presentation, albeit with wide CIs that included no difference.
This association was present in both combined and
in separate analyses, including the primary analyses
and in sensitivity analyses restricting the evidence to
studies using the Sepsis-3 definition, as well as those
providing adjusted estimates. The observed mortality
reduction associated with early antimicrobial therapy
appeared strongest and most consistent in patients
with septic shock. The recommended thresholds for
administering antimicrobial therapy, that is, within 1
and 3 hours, were selected based on the available summary estimates, whereas balancing the weaknesses
of the underlying evidence (observational studies at
high risk of bias with CIs that included no difference,
and limited power in some analyses) against the high
morbidity and mortality of sepsis. The two RCTs did
not show an association between early treatment and
reduced mortality but they primarily included patients
without septic shock, and the median differences in
time-to-antibiotics between the early vs. later antibiotic arms were well under 3 hours (13, 173).
Despite the growth in evidence since the 2021 SSC
guidelines (65, 66), the overall certainty of evidence
was adjudicated as very low due to persistent risk of
bias (the main body of evidence comprised of observational studies with an inherent risk of residual
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

Figure 2. Antimicrobial timing framework.

confounding, and most studies used inadequate risk
adjustment), inconsistency, indirectness (variations in
population/intervention/comparator and in the definition of time zero), and imprecision.
To increase the certainty of evidence for the effects
of early antimicrobial therapy in adults with sepsis or
septic shock, large high-quality multicenter (international) RCTs would be needed. Whether these are feasible from practical, resource, and ethical perspectives
is unlikely.
The recommendations on timing of antimicrobial
therapy are unchanged from the 2021 SSC guidelines
(65, 66).
Given the high risk of death with septic shock and
the more consistent and stronger association of antimicrobial timing and short-term mortality in patients
with septic shock, the panel issued a strong recommendation to administer antimicrobial therapy immediately (within 1 hr) in adults with possible, probable,
and definite septic shock and in adults with probable
Critical Care Medicine

or definite sepsis (Table 3). For adults with possible
sepsis without shock, where the diagnosis of bacterial
infection is less clear, the panel issued a conditional
recommendation for a rapid (within 3 hr) assessment
of infectious and noninfectious etiologies of illness.
This assessment may include additional history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing to determine
whether antimicrobial therapy should be administered. Antimicrobial therapy should be administered
as soon as bacterial infection appears to be the most
likely etiology of the patient’s illness and after no more
than 3 hours if a substantial concern for bacterial infection persists.
Limited data from low resource settings suggest
that timely administration of antimicrobial therapy in
patients with sepsis and septic shock is also beneficial
and feasible in these settings (174–178). Access and
availability of a wide range of antimicrobial therapy may
vary, however (179–183). Similarly, the availability and
turnaround time for laboratory testing, rapid diagnostic
www.ccmjournal.org     23

Prescott et al

tests, and imaging also vary widely by regions and settings (176). For this reason, the components of the rapid
assessment for infectious vs. noninfectious causes of
illness will vary by setting. In recognition of the variation in diagnostic testing capabilities, a recent Delphi
panel of global experts recommended: “for adults with
possible sepsis without shock, where investigators (such
as laboratory or imaging) to exclude a noninfectious
source of acute illness are not readily available and if
concern for infection persists, antimicrobial therapy
should be administered without delay” (184).
Timing of Antibiotic Initiation En Route to
Hospital
21. For adults with definite or probable sepsis and
New
hypotension (i.e., septic shock) and who have an
anticipated time to in-hospital medical evaluation
of over 60 min, we “suggest” administering
antimicrobial therapy in ambulance or flight.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Prehospital antibiotic delivery should
be implemented only after having a structured
process in place to screen for sepsis in ambulance
or flight, as discussed in recommendation 3.

Prehospital sepsis treatment is one way to reduce the
time to antibiotic administration for the half of sepsis
patients who arrive by ambulance (51–53). Prehospital
interventions are common in other conditions and have
improved outcomes for acutely ill patients (185–188).
Three systematic reviews evaluated the impact of
prehospital IV antibiotics on survival (58, 189, 190).
Most studies were observational. Meta-analysis of
observational studies was uncertain but suggested a
possible reduction in mortality with prehospital antibiotics (OR 0.58; 95% CI, 0.41–0.84, very low certainty).
Meta-analysis of RCTs also suggested that prehospital
antibiotics may reduce 28-day mortality (OR 0.85; 95%
CI, 0.66–1.09, low certainty), with most of the estimate
weight attributed to a single trial. One high-quality
trial showed no difference in 28-day mortality (RR
0.95; 95% CI, 0.74–1.24) when antibiotics were given
96 min sooner in the prehospital intervention arm, but
the control arm mortality was only 8%, suggesting a
low aggregate illness severity (173). The two studies
with the lowest relative mortality reduction had the
lowest control group mortality, whereas the two studies with the greatest mortality reduction had the highest control group mortality (173, 191–193). Given this
24     www.ccmjournal.org

relationship, the panel tailored this recommendation
to patients with evidence of septic shock, as demonstrated by definite or probable sepsis and hypotension
(e.g., SBP < 90; MAP < 65; SBP < 100 in patients with
known hypertension).
The panel also considered emergency medical services
(EMS) system characteristics. In EMS systems with short
transport times and rapid hospital antibiotic delivery,
prehospital antibiotics may have limited benefit, whereas
the impact may be greater in settings with longer transport times or prolonged within hospital delays. Some
studies with the greatest time-to-antibiotic reductions
were those in which delays occurred after hospital arrival
(192). Consequently, the panel limited this recommendation to those in whom the total medical contact delay
(time from EMS arrival to in-hospital evaluation) (194)
was projected to exceed 60 minutes, consistent with the
recommendation to administer antimicrobial therapy
within 1 hour for patients with septic shock.
Prehospital antibiotic administration may not be
feasible in all settings (e.g., LMIC) due to logistical,
financial, and regulatory constraints; therefore, early
sepsis identification and rapid hospital transport remain the highest priority. In other settings, tiered response systems mean that antibiotic availability may
be limited to a small number of EMS agencies.
Based on the evidence, the panel determined that
the balance of effects probably favors prehospital antibiotic administration in patients with sepsis and hypotension and who have an anticipated time to in-hospital
medical evaluation of over 60 minutes. Prehospital antibiotic delivery, if implemented, should be integrated
into regional sepsis care models to ensure availability
and safety for patients most likely to benefit. Wherever
possible, blood cultures should be collected before antibiotic administration.
Biomarker-Guided Initiation of Antimicrobial
Therapy
22. For adults with possible or probable sepsis Carryover
or septic shock, we “suggest” using clinical
evaluation alone over procalcitonin plus
clinical evaluation to decide whether to start
antimicrobial therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

This statement on performance was carried over, see
the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

Source Control
23. Adults with sepsis or septic shock should Carryover
be rapidly evaluated for specific anatomical
diagnoses or sources of infection that
require emergent source control.
(good practice statement)
24. For adults with sepsis or septic shock
and a specific anatomical diagnosis or
source of infection that requires source
control, we “suggest” early source control
over late source control, ideally within 6 hr
of diagnosis of sepsis or septic shock
requiring source control.
(conditional recommendation, very low
certainty evidence)

Revisited

Source control is a fundamental principle in the management of sepsis and septic shock (66, 195). It encompasses surgical and procedural interventions to remove
the source of infection, reduce the pathogen burden, or
correct anatomical issues that impede normal clearance
of infection. Examples include draining an abscess,
debriding infected necrotic tissue, removing a potentially infected device, or relieving anatomical blockage
such as a biliary stricture (196). Common foci of infection that are amenable to source control include intraabdominal abscesses, peritonitis due to gastrointestinal
perforation, cholangitis, cholecystitis, pelvic abscesses,
pyelonephritis associated with obstruction or abscess,
necrotizing soft-tissue infection, other deep space infections (e.g., empyema or septic arthritis), and infections
related to implanted devices including central catheters
(196, 197). Source control should be achieved as soon
as possible following initial resuscitation (198, 199), but
the optimal timeframe is unclear.
We identified 11 relevant observational studies (198–
208). Studies defined early source control in various ways,
most commonly as source control within 6 hours from either diagnosis or sepsis, diagnosis of septic shock, or identification of the need for source control. Meta-analysis of
these studies yielded uncertain findings due to the very
low certainty of evidence. However, point estimates suggest early source control may possibly reduce short-term
(up to day 90) mortality (RR 0.70; 95% CI, 0.51–0.95, very
low certainty), as compared with late source control. One
study evaluated mortality beyond 90 days and suggested
that early source control may result in a large reduction
in one-year mortality (RR 0.80; 95% CI, 0.71–0.95, very
low certainty), as compared with late source control. ICU
LOS may be slightly reduced (MD 2.4 d fewer; 95% CI,
Critical Care Medicine

6.3 d fewer to 1.5 d more, very low certainty), while impact of hospital LOS (MD 1.1 d fewer, 8.5 d fewer to 6.3 d
more) was trivial.
Based on the association between early source control and improved clinical outcomes, the panel issued a
conditional recommendation for early source control in
adults with sepsis or septic shock and a specific anatomical diagnosis or source of infection that requires source
control, as compared with late source control. Any required source control intervention in patients with sepsis
or septic shock should ideally be implemented as soon
as medically and logistically practical and safe after the
diagnosis is made (200). Given the observational studies that typically reported early source control as within
6 hours, the panel proposed this timeframe, but earlier
source control is consider better when feasible. Prolonged
efforts at medical stabilization without source control for
severely ill patients, particularly those with septic shock,
are unlikely to succeed (209).
The recommendation for early source control is consistent with the 2021 SSC guidelines, which included a
best practice statement in favor of early source control
(65, 66), as well as other guidelines (210–214).
Additional data on the optimal source control interventions, for example, invasive vs. minimally invasive
source control and percutaneous drainage vs. surgery,
and relevant measures of adequate resuscitation before
source control procedures are research priorities.
Empiric Multidrug Resistant (MDR) Pathogen
Coverage
25. For adults with sepsis or septic shock at high risk of New
infection with a specific multidrug resistant (MDR)
pathogen, we “suggest” using empirical antimicrobial
therapy with coverage for this MDR pathogen.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Risk factors for MDR pathogens include
colonization with the MDR pathogen of concern,
previous infection with the MDR pathogen of concern,
prolonged use of broad-spectrum antibiotics,
and prolonged hospitalization in a unit with a high
prevalence of the MDR pathogen of concern.
26. For adults with sepsis or septic shock at low risk
of infection with a specific MDR pathogen, we
“suggest against” using empirical antimicrobial
therapy with coverage for this MDR pathogen.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

New

www.ccmjournal.org     25

Prescott et al

The decision on whether to include an antimicrobial
agent active against specific multidrug resistant (MDR)
pathogen(s) of concern in the empiric treatment regimen for adults with sepsis or septic shock depends
upon 1) the likelihood that the patient’s infection is
caused by a specific MDR pathogen, 2) the risk of undesirable effects associated with withholding empiric
treatment for a specific MDR pathogen, 3) the risk of
undesirable effects associated with empiric treatment
that includes coverage for a specific MDR pathogen in a
person without infection with this specific MDR pathogen, and 4) patient’s severity of illness. MDR pathogens, defined as those with acquired non-susceptibility
to least one agent in three of more antimicrobial categories (215, 216), include Acinetobacter baumannii,
extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing
Gram-negative
bacteria,
carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacterales
(CRE),
vancomycin-resistant
Enterococcus, MDR pseudomonas, and methicillinresistant S. aureus (MRSA) (217). The incidence of
different MDR pathogens varies by setting and by patient characteristics (217, 218). Patient-related risk factors for MDR pathogens include colonization with the
MDR pathogen of concern in the prior year, infection
with the MDR pathogen of concern in the prior year,
prolonged use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, and prolonged hospitalization in a hospital with a high prevalence of the MDR pathogen of concern (219–222).
We identified one relevant RCT examining A. baumannii (223), 4 RCTs examining ESBL-producing
Gram-negative bacteria (224–227), 5 RCTs examining
CRE (228–232), and a systematic review of 15 observational studies examining MRSA infections (233).
Meta-analysis of these studies yielded very low certainty evidence but suggested a possible reduction in
short-term mortality with the use of empiric antimicrobial therapy with MDR coverage, as compared with
no MDR coverage (OR 0.71; 95% CI, 0.56–0.92, very
low certainty). This effect was driven by the observational data evaluating MRSA infection. There was
no observed difference in short-term mortality for
patients with A. baumannii, ESBL-producing Gramnegative bacteria, or CRE treated with agents active
against these pathogens vs. agents that were not.
The panel determined that the balance between the
desirable and undesirable effects of empiric MDR coverage varies by setting and patient-related characteristics and that MDR coverage in every adult with sepsis
26     www.ccmjournal.org

or septic shock would be unacceptable and result in
increased harm, particularly as a minority of sepsis cases
worldwide are caused by MDRs (4, 234–236). However,
selective use of empiric MDR coverage is warranted in
patients with risk factors for MDR infection, including in
many patients with hospital-acquired infections.
Additional data on the efficacy and safety of empiric MDR pathogen coverage is warranted, along with
studies evaluating nasal swab testing, rapid diagnostic
tools, and clinical prediction rules for the selection of
patients for specific MDR coverage.
Failure to cover specific MDR pathogens in a patient
with sepsis or septic shock caused by that specific pathogen may be harmful, but unnecessary specific MDR
coverage in a patient without that specific pathogen
may also be harmful. Therefore, the panel issued a conditional recommendation for using empiric MDR coverage in patients with a likelihood of infection with a
specific MDR pathogen.
Specific guidance on antibiotic selection is beyond
the scope of this guideline. We direct readers to relevant European Society of Clinical Microbiology and
Infectious Diseases and Infectious Diseases Society of
America guidelines on the treatment of MDR pathogens (216, 237). Also, where available, consultation
with infectious disease specialists and/or clinical
microbiologists should be considered to help with selection of antimicrobial therapy in patients with risk
factors for MDR pathogens.
Empiric Antifungal Coverage
27. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“suggest against” using empirical antifungal
therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Empiric antifungal therapy should
be considered on a case-by-case basis
in selected patients with sepsis or septic
shock and risk factors for fungal infection,
including immunosuppression, prolonged use
of antibiotics, prolonged hospitalization, and
intra-abdominal sources of infection.

Revisited

Sepsis and septic shock due to fungi are most commonly
observed in patients in the ICU and are associated with
poor outcomes (103, 238–241). While prompt initiation
of early appropriate empiric antibacterial therapy is warranted in adults with sepsis or septic shock, the impact
of adding empiric antifungal therapy is less certain (239,
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

242–244). Although patients with sepsis or septic shock
may not benefit from empiric antifungals in general,
selected patients with a high absolute risk for fungal infection probably will benefit. Risk factors for fungal infection include immunosuppression, prolonged exposure
to antibacterial drugs, prolonged hospitalization, and an
intra-abdominal source of infection (245).
We identified a relevant systematic review and
meta-analysis of seven RCTs (246), including the
EMPIRICUS trial (247). No additional trials were
identified, and the evidence base was unchanged from
the 2021 SSC guidelines (65, 66).
Meta-analysis suggested that there may be no important reduction in short-term mortality with the use of
empiric antifungal therapy, as compared with no antifungal therapy (RR 0.93; 95% CI, 0.66–1.32, low certainty).
The panel agreed that empiric antifungal therapy
is not indicated in every adult with sepsis or septic
shock. Generalized use of empiric antifungal therapy
in all adults with sepsis or septic shock may result in
reduced equity globally.
The recommendation is consistent with other recent
guidelines (210, 248).
Additional data on the efficacy and safety of empiric
antifungal therapy in specific subgroups of patients
with risk factors are warranted.
Failure to use empiric antifungal therapy in a patient with a fungal infection may be harmful, but
unnecessary use of empiric antifungal therapy in a patient without a fungal infection may also be harmful.
Therefore, the panel issued a conditional recommendation against the use of empiric antifungal therapy in
all adults with sepsis or septic shock but rather to consider empiric antifungal therapy in selected patients
with high absolute risk of fungal infection.
Empiric Anaerobic Coverage
28. For adults with sepsis or septic shock without
risk factors for anaerobic infection, we “suggest”
using an empiric antibiotic regimen without
anaerobic coverage.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of
evidence)
Remark: When coverage of potential multidrugresistant (MDR) pathogens is required, agents
with anaerobic activity (e.g., piperacillin–
tazobactam or carbapenems) are appropriate
when alternative agents lacking anaerobic
coverage are insufficient.

Critical Care Medicine

New

29. For adults with sepsis or septic shock with
New
specific risk factors for anaerobic infection, we
“suggest” using an empiric antibiotic regimen
that includes anaerobic coverage.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of
evidence)
Remark: Risk factors for anaerobic infection include
intra-abdominal or deep seated gynecological/
obstetric source of infection, necrotizing softtissue infection, head and neck infection, and CNS
abscesses or empyema.

The prevalence of sepsis and septic shock due to anaerobic bacteria is low, compared with aerobic bacteria
and fungi (217). Prompt initiation of appropriate empiric antimicrobial therapy is warranted in adults with
sepsis or septic shock, and the decision to include or
withhold anaerobic coverage depends on the anatomical site of infection, which influences likelihood of anaerobic infection (249). Patients with sepsis or septic
shock, particularly of lung or urinary origin, are unlikely to benefit from empiric anaerobic coverage; by
contrast, selected patients with specific risk factors
for anaerobic infection will likely benefit (250, 251).
Clinical scenarios with increased risk of anaerobic infection include intra-abdominal, gynecological, and
obstetric sources of infection, necrotizing soft-tissue
infection, head and neck infection, empyema, and
CNS abscesses (252, 253).
We identified a relevant systematic review and metaanalysis of two RCTs (254) that comprised the primary
evidence base. Furthermore, we identified several relevant observational studies (255–257). The panel also
discussed whether to include the ACORN trial (comparing empiric cefepime vs. piperacillin-tazobactam),
but did not do so, since it did not adequately fit the
PICO question (258). ACORN was deemed too indirect as it compared two specific antibiotics, not inclusion of anti-anaerobic coverage, and many patients in
the cefepime arm were co-treated with metronidazole
for anti-anaerobic coverage (258).
In meta-analysis of the two RCTs, there was an uncertain impact of empiric anti-anaerobic coverage
in general population of adult patients with sepsis
or septic shock, as compared with no anaerobic coverage (RR 1.56; 95% CI, 0.39–6.35, very low certainty).
Observational studies suggested an increased risk of
adverse outcomes, including increased mortality in
patients treated with empiric anti-anaerobic antibiotics (255–257).
www.ccmjournal.org     27

Prescott et al

The panel agreed that routine empiric antianaerobic coverage is not indicated.
The recommendation is consistent with other guidelines (259, 260) and in line with research on the anaerobic microbiome (261). It is also applicable to low
resource settings.
Additional trial data on the efficacy and safety of
empiric anaerobic coverage in adults with sepsis or
septic shock are warranted, given the suggestion of
harm in observational studies.
Withholding empiric anaerobic coverage in an
adult with anaerobic infection may be harmful, but
unnecessary use of empiric anaerobic coverage in an
adult without anaerobic infection may also be harmful (255–257). Therefore, the panel issued conditional
recommendations for including vs. withholding empiric anaerobic coverage based on risk of anaerobic
infection.
Microbiological Surveillance to Guide Empirical
Antimicrobial Therapy
30. There is “insufficient evidence” to make a
recommendation regarding use of departmental
(i.e., ICU-wide) microbiological surveillance
samples of the upper respiratory tract to guide
empirical antimicrobial therapy.

New

Infections with multidrug-resistant organisms, especially healthcare-associated infections, are a global
concern (262). Active surveillance cultures can be used
to identify patients colonized with multidrug-resistant
organisms, which may inform preventive measures,
including isolation; to reduce transmission; and to
guide empiric antimicrobial therapy (217, 263). Active
surveillance cultures of the upper respiratory tract may
be particularly useful to guide empiric antimicrobial
therapy of respiratory infections, including ventilatorassociated pneumonia (VAP).
We identified two systematic reviews on screening
strategies (264, 265), implemented at the department
or unit level, to detect carbapenem-resistant gramnegative bacteria, but none of the included trials
assessed microbiological surveillance samples of the
upper respiratory tract. We also identified an older
diagnostic test accuracy review, but no relevant clinical outcomes were assessed (266). Thus, the body of
evidence was insufficient to make a recommendation regarding the use of microbiological surveillance
28     www.ccmjournal.org

samples of the upper respiratory tract to guide empirical antimicrobial therapy.
“In our practice,” 36% of the panel uses departmental surveillance samples of the upper respiratory
tract to guide empirical antimicrobial therapy, whereas
64% of the panel does not. Among panel members
using surveillance samples, the majority (79%) collect
samples weekly.
With increasing prevalence of some multidrugresistant organisms (267) and insufficient evidence to
inform a recommendation regarding use of surveillance cultures of the upper respiratory tract, the panel
believes that knowledge about the clinical effects of surveillance cultures of the upper respiratory tract to guide
empirical antimicrobial therapy is a research priority.
Pathogen-Specific Rapid Diagnostic Tests
31. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
New
“suggest” using pathogen-specific rapid
diagnostic tests on a case-by-case basis in
selected patients based on clinical features, local
pathogen- and resistance patterns, seasonality,
and availability of tests and antibiotic stewardship
guidance.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence)

Pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests are used to guide
empiric antimicrobial therapy (268). Such tests may include molecular PCR-based tests, phenotypic assays, respiratory and other syndromic panels, or antimicrobial
resistance detection, each offering either rapid identification of pathogens or resistance detection to guide antimicrobial therapy. This may enable clinicians to better
target antimicrobial therapy, thereby improving clinical
outcomes and reducing both the unnecessary prescription of broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy and the
development of antimicrobial resistance.
We identified a relevant systematic review and
meta-analysis of 6 RCTs (269) and supplemented this
with one additional RCT since its publication (270).
The review included trials assessing different types
of pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests, including
molecular testing platforms and phenotypic assays in
adults with bloodstream infection.
There was possibly little to no difference in shortterm mortality with the use of pathogen-specific rapid
diagnostic tests, as compared with not using them (RR
1.03; 95% CI, 0.78–1.13, low certainty).
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

The panel agreed that the tests should not be used in
every adult with sepsis or septic shock, as generalized
use of them in all adults with sepsis or septic shock
is expected to result in increased costs without being
clearly beneficial to all patients. The use of these tests
in selected patients, however, may reduce the time to
appropriate and definite antimicrobial therapy, which
may in turn improve outcomes and reduce antimicrobial resistance. The use of these tests in isolation may
have a limited impact on patient-important outcomes
(271–273), but mortality benefits have been observed
when rapid diagnostic tests are paired with effective
antimicrobial stewardship programs (274).
Additional trial data on the efficacy and safety of
subtypes of pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests
in high-risk patients with sepsis or septic shock,
cost-effectiveness, and the long-term effects, including
on antimicrobial resistance patterns, were identified as
research priorities.
Although the use of pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic
tests is not indicated in all adults with sepsis or septic
shock, it may optimize the use of antimicrobial therapy
in some. Therefore, the panel issued a conditional recommendation for the use of pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests in selected adults with sepsis or septic shock,
based on clinical features, local pathogen- and resistance
patterns, seasonality, and availability of tests and antibiotic stewardship guidance. Since most low resource settings do not have access to these tests, the generalizability
of this recommendation to LMICs is limited.
Candida Fungal Biomarkers to Guide Initiation
of Antifungal Therapy
32. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“suggest against” using Candida fungal
biomarkers to guide initiation of empiric
antifungal therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Use of Candida biomarkers to guide
initiation of empiric antifungal therapy may be
considered on a case-by-case basis in selected
patients at high risk of Candida infection,
including those with immunosuppression,
prolonged exposure to antibiotics, prolonged
hospitalization, and intra-abdominal source of
infection.

New

Sepsis and septic shock caused by fungi are less
common but associated with poor outcomes (103,
Critical Care Medicine

238–241). Although it is crucial to start appropriate
empiric antibacterial therapy promptly in adults with
sepsis or septic shock, the benefit of adding empiric
antifungal therapy remains uncertain (239, 242–244).
Antifungal therapy is associated with clinically important undesirable effects, including drug-drug interactions, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, hyponatremia,
phototoxicity, visual disturbances, encephalopathy,
peripheral neuropathy, and selection of resistant fungi
(275–278). Empiric use of antifungal therapy is therefore not indicated for all patients with sepsis or septic
shock, but may be beneficial in selected patients at high
absolute risk of fungal infection. Generally, patients
with sepsis or septic shock may not benefit from empiric antifungals, but utilizing fungal biomarkers may
help identify patients who may benefit (279).
We identified one relevant RCT that assessed the
use of (1,3)-β-d-glucan to guide initiation of empiric
antifungal therapy in septic patients with high risk of
invasive Candida infection (280). Use of (1,3)-β-dglucan to guide initiation of empiric antifungal therapy
resulted in a possible slight decrease in mortality, as
compared with not using the biomarker (RR 0.95; 95%
CI, 0.71–1.28, low certainty).
The panel agreed that Candida biomarkers should
not be used to guide the initiation of empiric antifungal therapy in every adult with sepsis or septic shock,
as this is expected to result in increased costs with uncertain benefits. Use in selected patients at high risk
of invasive candidiasis, however, may be relevant and
improve clinical outcomes and reduce antimicrobial
resistance.
The recommendation is consistent with other recent guidelines (210, 248) and aligns with the conditional recommendation against empiric antifungal
therapy in this guideline. The International Guideline
on Candidiasis moderately recommends using serum
(1,3)-β-d-glucan for diagnosis of invasive Candida
infection, but cautions that diagnosis should not be
based solely on (1,3)-β-d-glucan, and that (1,3)-β-dglucan alone is not recommended for initiating antifungal therapy (248).
Additional trial data examining the efficacy and
safety of using fungal biomarkers to guide the initiation of empiric antifungal therapy is a research priority.
Failure to give empiric antifungal therapy to a patient
with fungal infection may be harmful, but unnecessary
use of empiric antifungal therapy in a patient without
www.ccmjournal.org     29

Prescott et al

fungal infection may also be harmful. Therefore, the
panel issued a conditional recommendation against the
use of Candida biomarkers to guide initiation of empiric
antifungal therapy in adults with sepsis or septic shock,
whereas their use in selected patients based on an assessment of the risk of fungal infection may be considered.
Prolonged Infusion of β-Lactam Antibiotics
33. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“recommend” using prolonged infusion of
beta-lactams for maintenance (after an initial
loading dose) over bolus administration.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty
evidence)

Revisited

Key pharmacokinetic parameters of beta-lactam antibiotics can change in patients with sepsis and septic shock,
potentially leading to sub-therapeutic concentrations
(281, 282). Unlike traditional intermittent bolus infusion
(lasting 30 min or less), administering beta-lactam antibiotics via prolonged IV infusion—either as an extended
infusion (over at least half of the dosing interval) or as a
continuous infusion—maintains consistent beta-lactam
concentrations that maximize the pharmacodynamics
of these drugs (283, 284). The shorter the half-life of the
drug, the greater the impact of extended or continuous
infusion has on drug concentrations. Whether the prolonged infusion translated into improved outcomes was
previously unclear, but additional evidence from large
RCTs has become available.
We identified a recent systematic review and metaanalysis of 18 RCTs (9,108 participants) (285), including the large international BLING III RCT (286).
Meta-analysis of these trials showed that prolonged
infusions reduce short-term mortality (RR 0.91; 95%
CI, 0.85–0.97, high certainty, which translates to 25
fewer deaths per 1,000 patients, 95% CI, 42 fewer to
8 fewer). In the one RCT that assessed days alive outside of ICU and hospital, prolonged infusion of betalactams likely resulted in more days alive out of ICU
(MD 1.5 d more, 95 CI, 0.1 fewer to 3.0 more, moderate certainty) and out of the hospital (MD 1.8 d
more, 95 CI, 0.3 more to 3.3 more, high certainty) than
intermittent infusion (bolus) (286).
Prolonged infusion is a viable intervention when suitable IV access is available and when resources can ensure
that the beta-lactam is infused over the required duration. This may pose challenges in low resource settings
with insufficient supply of infusion pumps. Increasing
30     www.ccmjournal.org

the supply of necessary supplies to administer prolonged
infusion of beta-lactams should be prioritized given the
very high probability of mortality benefit, particularly
when using beta-lactams with a shorter half-life (e.g.,
piperacillin-tazobactam, carbapenems).
Administering a loading dose of the antibiotic before prolonged infusion is crucial to avoid delays in
reaching effective beta-lactam concentrations (287).
Throughout therapy, both extended and continuous
infusions will occupy a venous catheter lumen for a
longer duration than intermittent infusions, making
drug stability and drug-drug compatibility important
considerations to ensure the effectiveness of antibiotic
and other IV drug therapies (288, 289).
The recommendation is consistent with the 2021
SSC guidelines (65, 66), but with BLING III (286) data
available, the certainty of evidence was assessed as
high. This informed a strong recommendation in favor
of the intervention. By contrast, the Dutch guidelines
for empirical antibacterial therapy for sepsis include a
strong recommendation for prolonged or continuous
infusion of piperacillin-tazobactam and carbapenems,
but a conditional (weak) recommendation for prolonged of continuous infusion of other beta-lactam
antibiotics due to their longer half-life (290).
The research priorities include the effects of prolonged infusions on the emergence of antimicrobial
resistance.
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (TDM) of
Antimicrobial Therapy
34. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
Revisited
“suggest” using antimicrobial therapeutic drug
monitoring (TDM) on a case-by-case basis in
selected patients, based on clinical features,
local pathogen- and resistance patterns, drug
class, and availability of TDM.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

Antimicrobial therapy is subject to changes in pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) properties
in sepsis and septic shock (291, 292). This may result
in concentrations that are either too low (risking clinical failure) or too high (potentially leading to toxicity)
(293). Augmented renal clearance (294), acute kidney
injury (295), hypoalbuminemia (296), RRT (297, 298),
extracorporeal life support (299, 300), and other conditions affect concentrations of many antimicrobials
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

in critically ill patients. Therapeutic drug monitoring
(TDM) is a dosing intervention applying PK/PD principles that may result in more effective and safe dosing
of antimicrobial therapy (301).
We identified a recent systematic review and metaanalysis of eight RCTs (1241 participants) (302) with
6 trials assessing TDM of antibacterials and two trials
assessing TDM of antifungals. The results of the metaanalysis were uncertain (very low certainty evidence).
However, point estimates suggested a possible reduction in short-term mortality with the use of TDM,
as compared with not using TDM (RR 0.92, 95%
CI, 0.75–1.11, very low certainty) (302), whereas the
effects for ICU LOS (MD 0.01 d fewer; 95% CI, 2.27 d
fewer to 2.25 d more, very low certainty) and hospital
LOS (MD 0.20 d more; 95% CI, 6.03 d fewer to 6.42 d
more, very low certainty) were considered trivial. The
potential effect on short-term mortality was driven by
the trials assessing TDM of antibacterials.
The use of TDM to guide dosing of antimicrobial
therapy may require extra resources and may therefore
result in increased costs and reduced equity, especially
in resource-limited areas where there is limited access
to TDM.
The recommendation is consistent with the 2021 SSC
guidelines, which included a best practice statement to use
accepted pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic principles
(66), and consistent with other guidelines (301).
The research priorities include additional trial data
on short- and long-term mortality, emergence of antimicrobial resistance, and health economic analyses.
Based on a potential effect of TDM on the assessed
desirable outcomes and no indication of harm, the
panel suggests using TDM as an optimized dosing
approach applying PK/PD principles in selected adults
with sepsis and septic shock, and if the necessary
equipment for TDM is available.
Antimicrobial De-escalation and
Discontinuation
35. Clinicians should continuously reevaluate
patients, search for alternative diagnoses,
and discontinue empiric antimicrobial
therapy if an alternative cause of illness
is demonstrated or strongly suspected
in adults with suspected sepsis or septic
shock but unconfirmed infection.
(good practice statement)

Critical Care Medicine

Revisited

36. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“recommend” de-escalation of antimicrobial therapy over no de-escalation when a
confirmed microbiological diagnosis and
susceptibility profile is available.
(strong recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: De-escalation involves discontinuing
unnecessary antimicrobial therapy or narrowing the spectrum of antimicrobial agents
where appropriate.

Revisited

37. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
Revisited
“suggest” de-escalation of antimicrobial therapy
over no de-escalation when no pathogens are
identified on final culture results.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

Antimicrobial exposure is associated with development of antimicrobial resistance, potential toxicities,
and risk for Clostridiodes difficile infection (163, 167,
303). Reducing both the number and the spectrum of
antimicrobial agents may help avert some of these adverse outcomes and is a key goal in hospital antimicrobial stewardship (304, 305). Broad-spectrum regimens
are common during the empiric phase of treating
sepsis when the causative pathogen has not yet been
identified. Once pathogen identity and susceptibilities
are determined, timely de-escalation of antimicrobial
therapy, including stopping unnecessary antimicrobial
therapy and switching to narrower spectrum agents, is
a logical approach (306).
We identified direct evidence from 26 studies, including two RCTs (307, 308). Meta-analysis was uncertain (very low certainty evidence). However, point
estimates suggested a possible reduction in short-term
mortality (26 studies, RR 0.77, 95% CI, 0.64–0.92,
very low certainty), ICU LOS (5 studies, MD 0.93 d
fewer; 95% CI, 4.42 d fewer to 2.56 d more, very low
certainty), hospital LOS (4 studies, 1.7 d fewer, 95%
CI, 1.8 fewer to 1.6 fewer, very low certainty), and
antimicrobial resistance (6 studies, RR 0.71, 95% CI,
0.55–0.91, very low certainty) with de-escalation of
empiric antimicrobial therapy, as compared with no
de-escalation. The effects were primarily driven by the
24 observational studies, but effect estimates in the
two RCTs were comparable. Nonetheless, this allows
for the possibility that the observed effects of deescalation in observational studies may be mediated
by de-escalation in patients who are already improving (i.e., confounding by indication). The reported
www.ccmjournal.org     31

Prescott et al

improvements in clinical outcomes with de-escalation
should therefore be interpreted with caution (306,
309).
The recommendations on de-escalation of empiric
antimicrobial therapy are consistent with other guidelines (305, 306, 310), as well as prior SSC guidelines
(65, 66).
Additional data from larger RCTs are needed to
confirm the proposed significant desirable effects from
de-escalation, including the effect on antimicrobial
resistance.
De-escalation appears safe, may offer cost savings
when unnecessary antimicrobial therapy are discontinued, and likely results in a reduction in the risk
of antimicrobial resistance, toxicity, and drug-drug
interactions (311). Therefore, the panel issued a strong
recommendation for de-escalation of empiric antimicrobial therapy when a confirmed microbiological
diagnosis and susceptibility profile is available, and
a conditional recommendation for de-escalation in
patients who are improving when no pathogens are
identified on final culture(s). The decision to de-escalate
antibiotics in the absence of a confirmed pathogen
depends on the clinical context and setting. In low resource settings with limited or low-quality laboratory
services and high rates of MDR pathogens, negative
culture testing may not provide the same reassurance as
in settings with high-quality laboratory services available, so the risk of undetected MDR pathogens should
be weighed carefully before antibiotic de-escalation.
Biomarker Guidance for Discontinuing
Antifungal Therapy
38. For adults with sepsis or septic shock who are
New
receiving empiric antifungal therapy, we “suggest
against” use of Candida fungal biomarkers to guide
discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence)
Remark: Use of Candida biomarkers to guide
discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy
may be considered on a case-by-case basis in
clinically improving selected patients at high risk
of Candida infection, including patients with
immunosuppression, prolonged use of antibiotics,
prolonged hospitalization, and intra-abdominal
source of infection.

We identified three relevant RCTs (312–314). All 3 trials assessed the use of (1,3)-β-d-glucan and/or mannan biomarkers to guide discontinuation of empiric
32     www.ccmjournal.org

antifungal therapy in adult ICU patients with suspected invasive fungal infection.
There was possibly little to no difference in shortterm mortality (3 trials, RR 1.03; 95% CI, 0.72–1.48,
low certainty), a possible small increase in hospital
LOS (1 trial, MD 1.8 d more, 95% CI, 4.1 d fewer to
7.7 d more, low certainty), and a possible increase in
ICU LOS (1 trial, MD 5.5 d more, 95% CI, 0.9 d fewer
to 11.9 d more, low certainty) with use of Candida
biomarkers to guide discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy, as compared with not using biomarkerguided discontinuation.
The panel agreed that Candida biomarkers should
not be used to guide discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy in all patients, as the balance of effects
favors not using them, and uncritical use would result
in increased costs without clinical benefit. Their use in
selected high-risk patients (e.g., patients with immunosuppression, prolonged use of antibiotics, prolonged
hospitalization, and intra-abdominal source of infection) may be relevant in some settings, as it may reduce
duration of antifungal treatment and thereby reduce
the risk of undesirable effects, including selection and
antimicrobial resistance. The recommendation is consistent with other recent guidelines (210, 248).
Additional trial data on the efficacy and safety of
using fungal biomarkers to guide discontinuation of
empiric antifungal therapy, including in subgroups
of patients with confirmed invasive fungal infection,
were identified as a research priority.
The unnecessary use of antifungal therapy is associated with undesirable effects, including selection for antimicrobial resistance. Use of Candida biomarkers to assist
in discontinuing empiric antifungal therapy in adult ICU
patients does not appear to improve outcomes. Therefore,
the panel issued a conditional recommendation against
the use of Candida biomarkers to guide discontinuation
of empiric antifungal therapy in all adults with sepsis or
septic shock, whereas it may be considered in selected
patients at high risk for invasive candidemia.
Duration of Antimicrobial Therapy
39. For adults with an initial diagnosis of sepsis Carryover
or septic shock and adequate source
control, we “suggest” using shorter over
longer duration of antimicrobial therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

This statement was carried over, please see the 2021
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66). Since the 2021
guidelines, the BALANCE trial comparing 7 vs. 14
days of antibiotic treatment for bloodstream infection was published, showing non-inferiority of a 7 day
treatment duration—providing further support for
shorter treatment durations.
Biomarker Guidance for Antibiotic
Discontinuation
40. For adults with an initial diagnosis of sepsis Carryover
or septic shock and adequate source
control where optimal duration of therapy is
unclear, we “suggest” using procalcitonin
AND clinical evaluation to decide when
to discontinue antimicrobial therapy over
clinical evaluation alone.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66). Since the 2021
guidelines, the ADAPT-Sepsis RCT provided additional evidence that procalcitonin can be used to
safely reduce antibiotic duration in patients with
sepsis (315).
Selective Decontamination of the Digestive
Tract
41. In mechanically ventilated adults with sepsis or
septic shock in units with a low prevalence of
antimicrobial resistance, we “suggest” using
selective decontamination of the digestive tract.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty
evidence)

New

Selective decontamination of the digestive tract
(SDD) is a preventive infection control strategy
consisting of the administration of nonabsorbable,
topical antimicrobial agents to the oropharynx and
upper gastrointestinal tract (oropharyngeal decontamination), with the administration of a short-term
course of broad-spectrum IV antimicrobial therapy
in mechanically ventilated patients. The topical antimicrobial agents used typically include a polymyxin,
tobramycin and amphotericin B, targeting aerobic
Gram-negative bacteria and fungi while sparing
anaerobes. SDD is specifically designed to eliminate pathogenic aerobic bacteria while preserving
Critical Care Medicine

anaerobic gut bacteria, essential to digestion and
immune function. It has been suggested that SDD
improves clinical outcomes, including mortality in
mechanically ventilated adults, through a reduction
in the incidence of VAP and bloodstream infections
(316). On the other hand, there are concerns that
SDD might increase rates of antimicrobial resistance,
although this has not been confirmed in most studies
(317, 318). Recently, additional evidence from large
RCTs has become available.
We identified an up-to-date systematic review
and meta-analysis of 32 RCTs (24,389 participants)
(319), including the large international Selective
Decontamination of the Digestive Tract in ICU Patients
(SuDDICU) trial (320). Large RCTs on SDD in settings
with high MDR prevalence are lacking.
The meta-analysis suggested a probable reduction in short-term mortality (30 trials, RR 0.91;
95% CI, 0.82–0.99, moderate certainty), more days
alive of the ICU (1 trial, 1.75 d more; 95% CI, 0.62
more to 4.12 more, moderate certainty), more days
alive outside of hospital (1 trial, 1.34 d more; 95%
CI, 0.89 fewer to 3.58 more, moderate certainty),
and possibly less antimicrobial resistance (RR 0.64;
95% CI, 0.50–0.81, 39–103 fewer events per 1000
patients, low certainty) with the use of SDD as
compared with no SDD in mechanically ventilated
adults (319). Counter to concerns, SDD appeared
to reduce antimicrobial resistance rates. The desirable effects of SDD appeared to be mainly driven
by the trials with individual patient randomization and those using SDD in combination with a
broad-spectrum IV antimicrobial agent targeting
aerobic Gram-negative bacteria (319).
The panel found it important to consider the local
prevalence of antimicrobial resistance when deciding
on using SDD or not, as the balance between the desirable and undesirable effects may be different in settings with a high vs. low prevalence of antimicrobial
resistance. In low resource settings where prevalence
of antimicrobial resistance is high and there is limited
availability of antimicrobial therapy, SDD should be
implemented on an ICU-by-ICU basis.
The SuDDICU trial was published after SSC guideline recommendations were finalized (321). In this
trial, randomization to SDD was associated with similar 90-day mortality (27.9% vs. 29.5%), fewer new
blood stream infections (4.9% vs. 6.9%), and fewer
www.ccmjournal.org     33

Prescott et al

antibiotic-resistant organisms cultured (16.8% vs.
26.8%) (321).
Based on the suggested improved clinical outcomes
from SDD in mechanically ventilated adults, including
a potential reduction in short-term mortality, the
panel issued a conditional recommendation for the use
of SDD in mechanically ventilated adults with sepsis or
septic shock in settings with a low prevalence of antimicrobial resistance. In settings with a higher prevalence of antimicrobial resistance, the effects of SDD
on the individual level must be balanced against the

potential effects on antimicrobial resistance, although
SDD has not been shown to increase antimicrobial
resistance.

HEMODYNAMIC MANAGEMENT
A quick guide for resuscitation and hemodynamic support in adults with sepsis and septic shock is presented
in Figure 3. This figure is not a comprehensive summary of hemodynamic management recommendations
in the SSC guidelines, but rather a quick reference to

Figure 3. Quick guide for resuscitation and hemodynamic support in adults with sepsis and septic shock. This figure is intended a quick
reference summarizing hemodynamic monitoring and interventions for patients with sepsis-induced hypotension of hypoperfusion. It is
not an exhaustive summary of statements on resuscitation included in the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines. We prioritized inclusion
of recommendations in this figure to quickly assist with bedside management, including the monitoring and interventions most commonly
used in clinical practice.
34     www.ccmjournal.org

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

summarize the hemodynamic monitoring and resuscitation interventions most often used in clinical practice.
Blood Pressure Monitoring
42. For adults with septic shock, we “suggest”
using either invasive or noninvasive blood
pressure monitoring.
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Invasive blood pressure monitoring is
advised in patients with shock who: require
intermediate-to-high dose vasopressors,
escalating doses of vasopressor, or multiple
vasopressors; are receiving frequent
arterial blood sampling; or have noninvasive
blood pressure measurements which are
inconsistent on repeated assessments.

Revisited

Arterial catheters allow for continuous blood pressure monitoring and frequent blood sampling, so are
commonly used in critically ill patients. However, variability in use exists across ICUs (322, 323). Potential
benefits include continuous and more accurate blood
pressure monitoring, ready access to arterial blood for
analyses (e.g., blood gases, lactate), and patient comfort; potential downsides include risk (e.g., infection,
thrombosis), costs, and clinician time. The 2021 SSC
guidelines (65, 66) suggested invasive blood pressure
monitoring as soon as practical and if resources are
available based on the discordance of invasive and
noninvasive measurements.
The panel Identified one RCT (324) in which adults
admitted to the ICU were randomized in weekly
blocks to restricted use or standard use of arterial
catheters. However, this study was reported only in abstract form, considered a mixed population (not just
sepsis), and had minimal separation in monitoring
device use between groups; therefore, it was not considered in recommendation formulation. Instead, we
relied on 4 observational studies (325–328) (28,516
total patients) assessing clinical outcomes and 12 studies (329–340) (57,114 total patients) evaluating blood
pressure concordance; all evidence was very low certainty. Despite the very low certainty evidence, no
difference was observed in mortality (5 studies for invasive vs. noninvasive monitoring: adjusted OR 1.06;
95% CI, 0.93–1.12) or RRT (1 study: adjusted OR 1.07;
95% CI, 0.66–1.73). Invasive monitoring was associated with more acute kidney injury (1 study: adjusted
OR 1.36; 95% CI, 1.22–1.51) and longer lengths of
Critical Care Medicine

stay (3 studies, ICU LOS: MD 1.61; 95% CI, 1.13–2.10
more days; 3 studies, hospital LOS: MD 3.51; 95% CI,
2.56–4.46 more days); yet potentially substantial residual confounding likely exists. Complications were
observed in 2.89% (95% CI 2.18–3.70%) of arterial
catheters in 1 study. Concordance of noninvasive with
invasive blood pressure measurements (defined as a <
10 mm Hg difference) was 73% (95% CI 66–81%) for
mean pressure (12 studies), 65% (95% CI 44–83%) for
systolic pressure (7 studies) and 85% (95% CI 71–96%)
for diastolic pressure (6 studies).
Although concordance of noninvasive with invasive
blood pressure was moderate, several panel members
raised concerns that the observed discordance may
lead to inappropriate vasopressor use or difficulties
maintaining target blood pressure with a noninvasive
approach. Ultimately, considering the very low certainty of evidence, the lack of clear associations with
clinical benefit, and concerns regarding equity, patient
comfort, and measurement discordance, the panel
issued a conditional recommendation supporting
the use of either noninvasive or invasive blood pressure monitoring. However, several panel members felt
strongly that measurement discordance should lead to
a suggestion to use invasive monitoring. Regional variability in standards of care was also acknowledged.
“In our practice,” most panel members (62.7%) use
invasive blood pressure monitoring in patients with
septic shock. Of the 37.3% that routinely treat adults
with septic shock without invasive monitoring, nearly
all (92.0%) measure noninvasive blood pressure at
least every 15 minutes during early shock or with escalating vasopressor doses (72.0% every 15 min, 20.0%
more frequently); less frequent assessments are more
common after the acute phase or with more stable
vasopressor doses (28.0% every 15 min, 32.0% every
30 min, 36.0% every 60 min). Further, only 28.0% have
a specific vasopressor dose at which they routinely initiate invasive monitoring (range: 0.1–0.5 µg/kg/min
norepinephrine equivalents).
The multicenter EVERDAC RCT testing a noninvasive strategy to blood pressure monitoring in circulatory failure (i.e., avoidance of arterial line unless
pre-specified safety criteria were met) was published
after the 2026 SSC guideline recommendations were
finalized (341). EVERDAC found that, among 1010
patients randomized, 28-day all-cause mortality was
noninferior in the noninvasive-strategy group (34.3%
www.ccmjournal.org     35

Prescott et al

mortality vs. 36.9% in the invasive-strategy, p = 0.006
for noninferiority) (341).
Fluid Type
43. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“recommend” using crystalloids as first-line
fluid for resuscitation.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty
evidence)

Carryover

44. For adults with sepsis or septic shock
Revisited
undergoing initial resuscitation, we “suggest” using balanced crystalloids over 0.9%
saline.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty evidence)
Remark: For patients with sepsis and traumatic
brain injury, we suggest using 0.9% saline.
45. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
Revisited
“suggest” using crystalloids alone over
crystalloids with supplemental albumin for
fluid resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation; moderate certainty evidence)
Remark: Use of supplemental albumin may be
appropriate for patients who already received
large crystalloid volumes or have cirrhosis.
Supplemental albumin should be avoided in
patients with traumatic brain injury.
46. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“recommend against” using starches for
resuscitation.
(strong recommendation, high-certainty
evidence)

Carryover

47. For adults with sepsis and septic shock,
we “suggest against” using gelatin for
resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation, moderate
certainty evidence)

Carryover

IV fluid administration is necessary for volume resuscitation in sepsis and septic shock, although the optimal type of fluid has been debated. Carried over from
the 2021 guidelines (65, 66), we recommend using
crystalloids as first-line for fluid resuscitation and
recommend against using starches. We also suggest
against using gelatins. Please see 2021 guidelines for
rationales regarding crystalloids as the first-line fluid
over starches and gelatins (65, 66).
In this iteration of the guidelines, we re-evaluated
whether to use balanced solutions, for example, lactated Ringer’s solution, (vs. 0.9% saline) and albumin
(vs. crystalloids). Although 0.9% saline remains the
36     www.ccmjournal.org

most widely used crystalloid (342), its use has been
associated with hyperchloremic acidosis and acute
kidney injury, leading to increased interest in balanced
crystalloids due to their lower chloride content (342).
The panel considered two recent reviews on use of balanced solutions in general critical care patients with
sepsis subgroups: one a systematic review and metaanalysis that included 11 studies and 35,884 patients
(343) and an individual patient data meta-analysis
(IPDMA) derived from 5 high-quality RCTs and 6,753
patients (344). The largest trials included in both the
review and IPDMA were SMART (345) (15,802 total
patients cluster-randomized in 1 center), BaSICS (346)
(10,520 total patients individually randomized in 75
centers), and PLUS (347) (5,037 total patients individually randomized in 53 centers).
The review showed that using balanced crystalloids
probably reduced mortality compared with 0.9% saline (OR 0.94; 95% CI, 0.85–1.04, moderate certainty)
and new RRT (OR 0.86, 95% CI: 0.74–0.99, high certainty) and may have had no effect on VFD (MD 0.18
higher; 95% CI, 0.45 lower to 0.81 higher, low certainty
evidence). Several secondary analyses have suggested
that the benefit of balanced solutions is greatest when
used throughout resuscitation (348–350). The panel
considered the balance of effects to probably favor
balanced crystalloids with cost, and availability of balanced solutions varying across settings, although nonproprietary balanced solutions (e.g., Ringer’s lactate)
are often similar in cost to 0.9% normal saline. The
certainty of evidence has strengthened from the 2021
guidelines due to added data.
Theoretically, albumin maintains intravascular
oncotic pressure compared with crystalloids (351).
Due to cost and the absence of clear benefit for its
use, however, the 2021 guidelines provided a conditional (previously, weak) recommendation for
using albumin in patients who had already received
large volumes of crystalloids. We identified five
new systematic reviews (352–356), a clinical practice guideline from the International Collaboration
of Transfusion Medicine (357), and two new randomized controlled trials (358, 359) totaling an additional 396 patients from published reports since
2020. Our current recommendation relied on six
RCTs of 4,383 patients with sepsis or septic shock,
or their subgroups in larger trials (351, 358–362),
including 3,013 (69%) from the ALBIOS (351) and
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

SAFE (362) trials. We found probably no effect of albumin on 28-day mortality (RR 1.01, 95%CI: 0.90–
1.14, moderate certainty). There was similarly no
effect on 90-day mortality, new-onset organ dysfunction, ventilator or vasopressor-free days, and the requirement for RRT. The panel considered the lack of
proven benefit and higher cost of albumin in making
this recommendation. The variability across trials
in the albumin dose, concentration, and indication
reduced evidence certainty due to inconsistency.
Considerations should be made for different populations. For patients with traumatic brain injury,
evidence suggests harm with the use of balanced
crystalloids (363) or albumin (364), leading the panel
to advise using 0.9% saline in this population. For
patients with cirrhosis, use of albumin in addition to
crystalloids may be preferred (365). Similarly, evidence
suggesting higher blood pressures (351), higher static
filling pressures (366), and lower net fluid balances
(351) with albumin led the panel to propose albumin
for patients who have already received large volumes
of crystalloids. These recommendations for the use of
balanced solutions and albumin concur with the 2024
ESICM clinical practice guidelines (367).
Liberal Vs. Conservative Approach to
Resuscitation
48. For adults with sepsis or septic shock who
Revisited
have already received fluid resuscitation with
30 mL/kg and have persistent hypoperfusion,
we “suggest” using either a liberal or a
restrictive fluid resuscitation strategy based
on individual patient and health system
factors.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)
Remark: There was wide variability in the
protocols used and the volume of fluids
received in the liberal vs. restrictive arms
across trials. Patient and health system factors
to be considered include patients’ current
clinical conditions and chronic illnesses
(e.g., heart failure) and the availability of
monitored beds (i.e., if a restrictive approach
necessitates vasopressor use).

Determining the optimal volume of fluid resuscitation for patients with sepsis or septic shock is difficult.
Restrictive and liberal approaches to ongoing resuscitation have been evaluated in multiple trials (121, 368–372),
but the studies vary widely with respect to definitions for
Critical Care Medicine

restrictive and liberal strategies, eligibility criteria, setting, timing, and duration of the interventions.
To inform our updated recommendations, we considered four RCTs (133, 371, 373, 374) that included
3,320 patients with sepsis who had ongoing hypoperfusion or shock after initial fluid resuscitation.
The pooled analysis demonstrated that a restrictive
(compared with a liberal) approach to ongoing fluid
management resulted in probably no difference in
mortality (RR 1.00; 95% CI, 0.91–1.10, moderate certainty). Furthermore, there were probably no differences in VFD, (MD 0.14 d fewer, 95% CI, –2.11 to 1.83,
low certainty), RRT (RR 0.99, 95% CI, 0.83–1.19, moderate certainty), renal replacement-free days (MD 0.43
d more, 95% CI, –0.59 to 1.45, moderate certainty),
and vasopressor-free days (MD 0.49 d more, 95% CI,
–0.37 to 1.35, moderate certainty).
The panel judged desirable and undesirable effects
to be trivial. Costs of a restrictive approach (due to
vasopressor use and requisite monitoring in certain
settings) were considered potentially higher, with
equity probably reduced. In addition, given differences in renal replacement free days and vasopressor
requirements between approaches, the panel thought
acceptability would vary across patients and clinicians. Taken together, these factors drove the decision
to suggest either approach to ongoing fluid resuscitation with advice that patient and health system factors
be considered. In low resource settings (e.g., LMICs
with limited access to invasive mechanical ventilation), the potential harms associated with fluid overload are greater, providing support for a restrictive or
more personalized approach to resuscitation (119).
The 2025 ESCIM clinical practice guidelines made
no recommendation regarding liberal vs. restrictive
approaches to fluid resuscitation, stating: “In adults
with sepsis or septic shock who need fluid resuscitation for circulatory failure, we cannot recommend for
or against systematic restrictive or liberal fluid resuscitation” (123). In general, both the SSC statement and
ESICM practice guidelines acknowledge the equivalence between liberal and restrictive strategies and
provide support for more personalized approaches to
resuscitation, as discussed in the next statement. We
chose to make a conditional “ether/or” recommendation rather than a statement of no recommendation
based on our process for selecting type of statement
(Fig. 1).
www.ccmjournal.org     37

Prescott et al

Fluid Resuscitation Guided by Dynamic
Measures
49. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
Revisited
“suggest” using dynamic measures to guide
fluid resuscitation over physical examination
or static measures alone.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)​
Remark: Dynamic measures include response
to a passive leg raise or a fluid bolus using
stroke volume (SV), stroke volume variation
(SVV), pulse pressure (PP), or pulse pressure
variation (PPV).

Patients with sepsis or septic shock often require additional IV fluid following an initial 30 mL/kg fluid
resuscitation. However, additional resuscitation fluid
must be balanced against the risk of fluid accumulation and potential harm associated with fluid overload,
for example, prolonged mechanical ventilation, progression of acute kidney injury, and increased mortality. As discussed in the prior statement, liberal and
restrictive fluid strategies were judged to be equivalent
based on the EtD summary of judgments.
To avoid over-resuscitation or under-resuscitation,
fluid administration beyond the initial resuscitation
phase should be guided by careful assessment of intravascular volume status, organ perfusion, and fluid responsiveness. Heart rate, central venous pressure, and
systolic blood pressure are poor indicators of whether
a patient will benefit from additional IV fluid. Rather,
dynamic measures better predict fluid responsiveness
than static measures (375). Increases of 10–15% in the
chosen parameter (e.g., stroke volume) following a
fluid challenge or passive leg raise maneuver are reflective of fluid-responsiveness (375).
We identified 3 meta-analyses (375–377) examining
the use of dynamic measures to guide fluid resuscitation, with 18 total RCTs included across the three analyses. The majority of RCTs were single-center studies
with fewer than 100 patients. In a separate metaanalysis done for these SSC guidelines and inclusive
of all 18 RCTs, fluid management guided by dynamic
measures likely reduces mortality (18 RCTs; RR 0.91;
95% CI, 0.79–1.06, moderate certainty, translating to
28 fewer deaths per 1,000 patients; 95% CI, 65 fewer to
19 more), likely results in a large reduction in need for
RRT (6 trials, RR 0.75; 95% CI, 0.58–0.98, moderate
certainty, translating to 71 fewer patients receiving
38     www.ccmjournal.org

RRT; 95% CI, 119 fewer to 6 fewer), and may result in a
slight increase in ventilation-free days (MD 0.79 more
days; 95% CI, 1.28 fewer days to 2.86 more days, very
low certainty). In the only multicenter RCT focused on
patients with sepsis-induced hypotension, fluid management guided by dynamic measures was associated
with a lower net fluid balance at 72 h (MD –1.37L; 95%
CI, –2.53L to –0.21L), lower receipt of RRT, and lower
receipt of invasive mechanical ventilation (378).
Most data informing fluid resuscitation in sepsis
originate from high resource settings, and there is limited evidence from low resource settings to guide either the best fluid resuscitation approach or suitable
safety endpoints. An RCT in patients with sepsis and
hypotension in Zambia showed that early protocolized
resuscitation with fluid administration guided by static
measures and vital signs only (jugular venous pressure,
respiratory rate, and arterial oxygen saturation), was
associated with significantly more fluid administration in the first 6 h (median 3.5L vs. 2.0 L) and higher
hospital mortality than standard care (48.1% vs. 33%)
(121).
Point of care ultrasound (POCUS), noninvasive
cardiac monitoring, and invasive cardiac monitoring can be employed to measure stroke volume (SV).
However, measurements of inferior vena cava diameter or collapsibility principally reflect central venous
pressure (CVP) and are subject to the same limitations
as CVP measurement. A systematic review and metaanalysis showed that use of POCUS-guided resuscitation probably reduces 28-day mortality (RR 0.88;
95% CI, 0.78–0.99) (379). Although dynamic echocardiographic estimation of SV and changes in this
parameter can be useful, this modality requires technical expertise and experience that may not be readily
available in low resource settings. Changes in pulse
pressure in patients with clinical characteristics that
permit valid interpretation (i.e., mechanically ventilated, without spontaneous respiration), although less
accurate, may be particularly useful in low resource
settings to assess fluid responsiveness in guiding resuscitation (156).
The SSC guideline suggestion to use dynamic measures to guide fluid resuscitation is consistent with the
ESCIM clinical practice guideline recommendation:
“In adults with sepsis or septic shock who require
fluid resuscitation for circulatory failure, we suggest
using an individualized approach compared with a
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

non-individualized approach during the optimization
phase” (123).
Cardiac Output Monitoring Devices
50. For adults with septic shock, there is “insufficient New
evidence” to make a recommendation on using
minimally invasive or noninvasive cardiac output
monitoring in addition to usual care.
Remark: Minimally invasive cardiac output monitoring
refers to devices requiring an arterial catheter.
Noninvasive cardiac output monitoring refers to
devices using bioreactance. Usual care refers to
care without a pulmonary artery catheter. The use
of critical care ultrasound was not evaluated.

Cardiac output has historically been measured by
pulmonary artery catheterization (380–382), but this
technique is invasive and lacks proven benefit in sepsis
(383, 384). More recently, minimally-invasive (using a
peripheral arterial catheter and pulse power or pulse
wave analysis) and noninvasive (using surface sensors
and pulse wave analysis, bioreactance, bioimpedance,
or other techniques) monitors have been developed
(385), which allow continuous assessment of cardiac
output with potentially fewer risks than pulmonary artery catheterization (386).
Three RCTs (387–389) of 225 patients evaluated
the use of minimally invasive cardiac output monitors in septic shock, with pulse wave analysis used in
all three. These studies demonstrate an uncertain effect
on 28-day mortality (RR 0.92; 95% CI, 0.60–1.43, very
low certainty evidence), a possible reduction in ICU
LOS of (MD 2.09 d fewer; 95% CI, 0.85–3.34 d fewer,
low certainty evidence) and invasive mechanical ventilation duration (MD 1.42 d fewer; 95% CI, 0.43–2.4
d fewer, low certainty evidence), but no information
on potential adverse events related to the peripheral
arterial catheters. Three RCTs (378, 390, 391) of 310
patients assessed the impact of noninvasive cardiac
output monitors in septic shock, all of which used bioreactance. Pooled analysis showed an uncertain effect
on 28-day mortality (RR 0.77; 95% CI, 0.42–1.42, very
low certainty evidence), ICU LOS (MD 1.03 d fewer;
95% CI, 3.51 fewer to 1.45 more, very low certainty evidence), hospital LOS (MD 0.74 d fewer; 95% CI, 1.73
fewer to 0.15 more, low certainty evidence), and organ
dysfunction (any: RR 1.11; 95% CI, 0.52–2.37 and
acute kidney injury: RR 1.82; 95% CI, 0.51–1.32, both
very low certainty evidence).
Critical Care Medicine

The small number of patients evaluated in studies of both minimally invasive and noninvasive cardiac output monitors led the panel to conclude there
was insufficient evidence to issue a recommendation
addressing their use. However, given the cost of these
devices, concerns exist about their availability in low
resource settings impacting equity.
We did not consider critical care ultrasound in our
evidence synthesis. However, a recent SCCM guideline
on critical care ultrasonography included conditional
recommendations for use of critical care ultrasound in
the management of adults with septic shock and to inform volume management in acutely ill adults (392).
“In our practice,” 74.6% of panel members have
minimally invasive (using an arterial catheter) cardiac output monitors and 31.3% of panel members
have noninvasive (bioreactance) monitors available
at their hospital. Of those with availability, 24.0% of
panel members use minimally invasive monitors and
23.8% use noninvasive monitors in a majority (≥ 50%)
of their patients with septic shock. The panel strongly
encourages additional research into the efficacy, safety,
and cost effectiveness of these newer modalities for
cardiac output monitoring.
Serial Lactate Measurement
51. For adults with sepsis and elevated lactate
Revisited
or septic shock, we “suggest” using serial
lactate measurements to guide resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)​
Remark: Fluid administration should be
individualized after initial fluid bolus and
monitoring of lactate decrement, rather than
continuing fluids until lactate normalization is
achieved.

Serum lactate is a critical biomarker for assessing tissue
hypoxia and dysfunction, though it does not directly
measure tissue perfusion (393). The Sepsis-3 definitions explicitly include elevated lactate as a marker of
cellular dysfunction alongside refractory hypotension,
underscoring its role in identifying patients requiring
urgent resuscitation (1).
Recent evidence has refined lactate-targeted resuscitation strategies. Meta-analyses comparing lactateguided therapy with traditional approaches, such as
early goal-directed therapy or central venous oxygen
saturation-guided therapy, consistently show that
www.ccmjournal.org     39

Prescott et al

lactate-guided therapy is associated with improved
mortality and reduced organ dysfunction (394–398).
For example, focusing on serial lactate measurements
and clearance rates (e.g., ≥ 10% reduction every 2 hr)
rather than static normalization has been associated
with better clinical outcomes, including shorter ICU
stays and lower severity scores (395). These findings
highlight the importance of dynamic monitoring over
single-timepoint measurements.
The panel emphasizes that clinicians consider lactate trends with clinical assessment, such as hemodynamics and organ perfusion. Fluid administration
should be individualized after initial boluses, as excessive fluids to normalize lactate may cause harm. Access
to lactate testing may be limited in some low resource
settings (179–183, 399–401). Although lactate-guided
therapy demonstrates utility, variability in study
designs and unclear optimal clearance thresholds contribute to the conditional recommendation and low
certainty of evidence (394–398). This conditional recommendation balances lactate’s value as a biomarker
with the need for personalized, context-driven care,
avoiding over-reliance on a single parameter in complex clinical scenarios.
In low resource settings without access to lactate
measurement, alternative approaches suggested by an
expert Delphi panel include capillary refill time (CRT)
and urinary output as guides to resuscitation (184).
Capillary Refill Time
52. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
we “suggest” using capillary refill time to
guide resuscitation as an adjunct to other
measures of perfusion.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Revisited

CRT is a marker of peripheral tissue perfusion (402). It
is one of the few bedside physical examination measure
that may serve as both a triage and monitoring tool for
resuscitation efforts in patients with sepsis or septic
shock (403, 404). Although ambient lighting, temperature, skin pigmentation, and peripheral vascular disease must be considered during interpretation, CRT
may be performed in various clinical settings (403,
405).
Among critically ill patients, abnormal or prolonged
CRT is associated with increased mortality, similar to
40     www.ccmjournal.org

other resuscitation targets such as lactate and MAP
(406). However, MAP and lactate do not always correlate with CRT for patients in shock, suggesting that
CRT provides distinct hemodynamic information during resuscitation (407, 408). In contrast to lactate, CRT
can change quickly (e.g., within 10 min), allowing for
more timely assessment of response to resuscitative
interventions such as a fluid challenge or vasopressor
administration (409).
We identified 2 RCTs in which 233 total patients
were randomized to receive targeted resuscitation
using CRT with the goal of normalizing CRT to less
than or equal to 3 seconds or targeted resuscitation
using lactate measured every 2 hours with a goal of normalization or reduction by 20% (400, 410). The 28-day
mortality risk ratio was 0.82 (95% CI, 0.65–1.04) with
an absolute mortality reduction of 74 per 1000 deaths
(95% CI, 144 fewer, 16 more). The remaining outcomes
were assessed from the ANDROMEDA-SHOCK trial
(400) for 90-day mortality and RRT with risk ratio 0.88
(95% CI, 0.71–1.09) and 0.71 (95% CI, 0.47–1.10), and
absolute risk reduction of 56 per 1000 deaths (95% CI,
135–42) and 57 fewer RRT per 1000 (95% CI, 105–20),
respectively. There were no statistically significant differences in VFD, RRT-free days, or vasopressor-free
days. A subsequent RCT suggested that stopping fluids
in patients with CRT less than or equal to 3 seconds
appeared safe without compromising tissue perfusion
(410).
Although the small sample size, limited number
of events, and wide CIs constrained the evidence to
low certainty, the balance of effects probably favors
use of CRT as part of a targeted resuscitation strategy.
Although there are limited studies to assess resource
utilization, and the ANDROMEDA-SHOCK trial
(400) used a standardized approach requiring training,
the panel determined that CRT is feasible, reproducible, and may be readily implemented in low resource
settings in conjunction with other validated tools of
resuscitation.
The multicenter ANDROMEDA-SHOCK-2 RCT
(411, 412) testing a CRT-guided resuscitation protocol
in patients with septic shock was published after evidence synthesis and recommendations were finalized.
In this trial, among 1467 patients included in the primary analysis, randomization to a personalized resuscitation protocol targeting CRT was associated with
better outcomes compared with usual care. Specifically,
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

the win ratio for the hierarchical composite primary
outcome of mortality, duration of vital support, and
length of hospital stay at 28 days was 1.16 (95% CI,
1.02–1.33, p = 0.04).
IV Vasopressors
53. For adults with septic shock, we
“recommend” using norepinephrine as the
first-line agent over dopamine, epinephrine,
or selepressin.
(strong recommendation)
Dopamine. High-certainty evidence
Epinephrine. Low certainty evidence
Selepressin. Low certainty evidence

Carryover

54. For adults with septic shock, we “suggest
against” using terlipressin.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Carryover

55. For adults with septic shock, we “suggest”
using norepinephrine as the first-line agent
over vasopressin or angiotensin II.
(conditional recommendation)
Vasopressin. Low certainty evidence.
Angiotensin II. Very low certainty evidence.

Revisited

56. For adults with septic shock on escalating
Revisited
doses of norepinephrine, we “suggest” adding vasopressin.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty evidence)
57. For adults with septic shock and inadequate Revisited
MAP levels despite norepinephrine and vasopressin, we “suggest” adding epinephrine.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: In settings where vasopressin is not
available, epinephrine can be added to norepinephrine alone.
58. For adults with septic shock with
New
concomitant cardiac dysfunction, we
“suggest” using either norepinephrine or
epinephrine as first line vasopressor.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Norepinephrine may be preferred
in patients with tachyarrhythmia or
significant sinus tachycardia. Conversely,
epinephrine may be preferred in patients
with bradyarrhythmia or significant sinus
bradycardia.

Consistent with the 2021 SSC guidelines, the panel
identified norepinephrine as the first-line vasopressor for treatment of septic shock. Comparisons to
Critical Care Medicine

dopamine, epinephrine, and selepressin were carried
over; comparisons of norepinephrine (a catecholamine) to vasopressin (which directly induces vasoconstriction via V1a receptors, stimulates V1b receptors
in the anterior pituitary leading to adrenocorticotropic
hormone secretion and subsequent cortisol production (413), and attenuates endothelial-driven vasodilation through purinergic and oxytocin receptors (413))
and angiotensin II (which induces vasoconstriction via
angiotensin II type 1 receptors, stimulates aldosterone
release, and enhances myocardial contractility) were
reevaluated.
The panel identified two RCTs of 658 total patients
randomized to vasopressin vs. norepinephrine as
first-line vasopressor (414, 415). Meta-analysis found
there was possibly no difference in mortality (RR
1.07; 95% CI, 0.90–1.28, low certainty evidence),
but probably less use of RRT (RR 0.70, CI 0.53–0.92,
moderate certainty evidence) with vasopressin.
Although evidence was low or very low certainty, vasopressin did not appear to result in differences in lifethreatening arrhythmia or ischemia (digital,
mesenteric, or myocardial).
The panel identified no RCTs comparing angiotensin II to norepinephrine as first-line therapy; two
RCTs of 341 total patients already on norepinephrine
who were randomized to the addition of angiotensin II
vs. norepinephrine along were considered as indirect
evidence (416, 417). Meta-analysis found that addition
of angiotensin II may result in a reduction in mortality
(RR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.69–1.06, low certainty evidence)
but with an uncertain effect on ventricular arrythmias,
ischemia (peripheral, intestinal, or myocardial), or
deep vein thrombosis (all very low certainty evidence).
As the balance of effects did not favor vasopressin
or angiotensin II over norepinephrine (and the data
on angiotensin II were indirect), the panel weighed
strongly that vasopressin and angiotensin II tend to
be more expensive and less available than norepinephrine, especially in low resource settings (418). In the
low resource settings without access to norepinephrine, epinephrine has been recommended as an acceptable alternative by a Delphi panel of experts (184).
Consistent with the 2021 SSC guidelines (65, 66), the
panel suggests sequentially adding vasopressin and then
epinephrine for patients requiring escalating doses of norepinephrine to maintain mean arterial blood pressure. To
evaluate the addition of vasopressin in this context, we
www.ccmjournal.org     41

Prescott et al

performed a meta-analysis of 9 RCTs (419–426) (1,439
total patients, including 778 [54.1%] from the only multicenter trial, VASST (419)). Meta-analysis found a probable reduction in mortality with adding vasopressin
compared with increasing norepinephrine alone (RR
0.89; 95% CI, 0.79–1.01, moderate certainty). Although
28-day mortality did not differ between groups in VASST
(vasopressin 35.4% vs. norepinephrine 39.3%, p = 0.26),
subgroup analyses suggested adding vasopressin may
benefit patients in less severe shock (norepinephrine
equivalent dose <15 µg/min; 28-day mortality 26.5% vs.
35.7%, p = 0.05). Compared with norepinephrine monotherapy, adjunctive vasopressin probably results in less
atrial fibrillation (RR 0.66; 95% CI, 0.42–1.05, moderate
certainty evidence), but possibly more digital ischemia
(RR 2.87; 95% CI, 0.84–9.82, low certainty). These findings are consistent with published meta-analyses (427).
“In our practice,” 85.1% of panel members add vasopressin in patients with septic shock on escalating
doses of norepinephrine. Panelists using vasopressin
initiate it at a median dose of 0.3 μg/kg/min of norepinephrine (IQR 0.2–0.5 μg/kg/min). This dosing is
similar to a recent observational study in which a reinforcement machine learning model suggested initiating vasopressin at a median 0.20 μg/kg/min (IQR
0.08–0.45 μg/kg/min), as compared with clinician initiation of vasopressin at a median 0.37 μg/kg/min (IQR
0.17–0.69 μg/kg/min) (428).
The panel relied on an indirect estimate from a published network metanalysis (429) (31 RCTs with 5928
patients and 11 comparators) to evaluate the addition
of epinephrine vs. escalating norepinephrine. Results
found an uncertain effect on mortality of combined
epinephrine and norepinephrine over norepinephrine
alone (OR 0.65; 95% CI, 0.19–2.18, very low certainty
evidence), but no data were available for the addition of
epinephrine to both norepinephrine and vasopressin.
There was also an uncertain effect on arrhythmias (OR
1.68; 95% CI, 0.05–60.10, very low certainty evidence).
The panel’s suggestion was driven by the possible mortality benefits of adding vasopressin and epinephrine,
in order, rather than continuing to escalate norepinephrine. Given the widespread availability and safety
profile of epinephrine, however, we suggested adding
epinephrine to norepinephrine alone in settings where
vasopressin is not available.
“In our practice,” 55.2% of panel members add epinephrine in patients with septic shock on escalating
42     www.ccmjournal.org

doses of norepinephrine. Panelists using epinephrine
initiate it at a median dose of 0.8 μg/kg/min of norepinephrine (IQR 0.5–1.0 μg/kg/min).
Despite the potential theoretical benefits of adding
a vasopressor with a completely different mechanism
of action, a PICO question examining second or thirdline use of angiotensin II was not prioritized. We did,
however, examine trials on the addition of angiotensin
II as indirect evidence for the PICO question on firstline vasopressor selection, as discussed above.
Overall, given the high mortality of septic shock and
low certainty of evidence informing practice, there is
a need for further studies to inform vasopressor selection and titration. Specifically, further study is
needed to confirm whether adding vasopressin and
epinephrine improves outcomes, to address the timing
of adjunctive vasopressor initiation (at what norepinephrine dose and when in the septic shock course),
to address the benefits of multimodal vasopressor
strategies, and to identify potential subgroups underlying heterogeneity of treatment effect. There are
ongoing clinical trials to assess first-line vasopressor
selection (NCT02118467) and initiation of vasopressin
(NCT06217562; NCT06464510).
Although both norepinephrine and epinephrine are
catecholamines, their pharmacological profiles and
clinical effects differ (430). Norepinephrine acts predominantly on alpha-1 receptors, producing strong
vasoconstriction. It has mild beta-1 activity providing
limited inotropic support without affecting heart rate or
myocardial oxygen demand (430). Epinephrine, in contrast, exerts potent beta-1, beta-2, and alpha-1 receptor
stimulation resulting in combined vasoconstriction
and robust inotropic and chronotropic effects. For this
reason, epinephrine may benefit patients with septic
shock and concomitant cardiac dysfunction. However,
epinephrine’s benefits may be offset by drawbacks including tachyarrhythmias, increased myocardial oxygen
consumption, and a rise in serum lactate—complicating
lactate use as a perfusion biomarker (430).
The panel Identified no trials evaluating patients
with septic shock and concurrent cardiac dysfunction.
We Identified one randomized trial (the CAT Study
(431)) of 280 patients, 158 with sepsis, which found
epinephrine as compared with norepinephrine had an
uncertain effect on mortality (HR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.53–
1.32, very low certainty) (431), consistent with the indirect effect from a network metanalysis (33 RCTs, 3470
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

patients, 16 different comparators; OR for norepinephrine vs. epinephrine 1.35; 95% CI, 0.71—2.56) (432).
In the CAT study, there was possibly no difference in
vasopressor-free days (epinephrine median 26.3, IQR
17.2–27.3 vs. norepinephrine 24.2, 7.7–26.5, p = 0.13,
low certainty) and indirect evidence suggests epinephrine may increase tachyarrhythmias and lactic acidosis
(431, 433). In this context, the panel did not favor epinephrine over norepinephrine—or vice versa—for
adults with septic shock requiring vasopressors in the
setting of concomitant cardiac dysfunction.
Methylene Blue
59. For adults with refractory septic shock
and escalating vasopressor requirements,
there is “insufficient evidence” to make a
recommendation on IV methylene blue.
Remark: Although methylene blue may improve
blood pressure, there is insufficient evidence to
determine if its use as rescue therapy improves
survival; some patients with potentially treatable
disease may value a trial.
Remark: “In our practice,” 69% of panelists “never”
or “almost never” use methylene blue as rescue
therapy, 23% “sometimes” use it, 6%’usually’ use
it, and 1.5% “almost always” use it.

New

Methylene blue is a phenothiazine derivative that is
standardly used for treatment of methemoglobinemia
at doses of 1.0–2.0 mg/kg over 5–30 minutes, which
can be repeated one hour later if symptoms persist.
Methylene blue has also been used and studied as a
rescue therapy in septic shock due its ability to improve vascular tone through inhibition of endothelial
and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and downstream inhibition of soluble guanylate cyclase (434).
We updated an existing systematic review of six
RCTs (434), identifying two additional small RCTs
(435, 436), comparing IV methylene blue to usual
care or placebo in patients with septic shock. Dosing
regimens of methylene blue in these RCTs varied (e.g.,
one-time infusion of 0.5–2.0 mg/kg; 100 mg every 6 hr;
2.0 mg/kg followed by 0.25–2.0 mg/kg daily or hourly).
Although there is very low certainty evidence for its
impact upon mortality (RR 0.79; 95% CI, 0.60–1.03,
very low certainty), methylene blue likely results in a
reduction in duration of vasopressors (MD –1 d; 95%
CI, –1.8 to –0.20, moderate certainty). Certainty of evidence for other outcomes, such as duration of ventilation and LOS is low. Although studies of other iNOS
Critical Care Medicine

inhibitors have demonstrated increased mortality
(437), the largest study of methylene blue included
only 90 patients and had no longer-term mortality data
(438). Values and preferences would play an important
role in choosing whether to use IV methylene blue as a
rescue therapy in refractory septic shock, given the lack
of evidence regarding longer-term mortality and functional outcomes, which may be quite poor in this very
sick population. The role of shared decision-making
was supported by the patient panel.
Methylene blue may be more acceptable to patients
with otherwise potentially survivable illness and recovery to a patient-acceptable quality of life; in moribund patients for whom longer-term survival or an
acceptable quality of life are unlikely, it is less likely to
be acceptable. The panel thus made a conditional recommendation for either using or not using IV methylene blue in refractory septic shock. Lastly, the panel
noted that in some low resource settings where other
vasopressor treatments are unavailable (e.g., countries
without access to vasopressin), methylene blue may
represent the only viable second-line treatment option
for refractory septic shock and thus may be used as a
rescue therapy earlier in resuscitation. “In our practice,”
69% of panelists “never” or “almost never” use methylene blue as rescue therapy, 23% “sometimes” use it,
6%’usually’ use it, and 1.5% “almost always” use it.
Inotropes
60. For adults with septic shock and cardiac
dysfunction with persistent hypoperfusion
despite adequate fluid status and arterial
blood pressure, we “suggest” using
inotropes over no inotropes.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: For patients requiring vasopressors
to maintain mean arterial pressure at target,
inotropes should be used in addition to (not
instead of) vasopressors.

Revisit

61. For adults with septic shock with persisRevisit
tent hypoperfusion and cardiac dysfunction
despite adequate fluid resuscitation and
arterial blood pressure, we “suggest” adding
dobutamine to norepinephrine or using epinephrine alone.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Data were insufficient to make a recommendation for dobutamine vs. milrinone.
www.ccmjournal.org     43

Prescott et al

62. For adults with septic shock and cardiac
dysfunction with persistent hypoperfusion
despite adequate volume status and arterial
blood pressure, we “suggest against” using
levosimendan.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Carryover

Sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction is common among
patients with septic shock and may contribute to worsened clinical outcomes (439). Cardiac dysfunction
should be suspected following evaluation with bedside echocardiography (440) or cardiac output monitoring devices. After adequate fluid resuscitation and
restoration of arterial blood pressure, inotropes may
be beneficial for patients with cardiac dysfunction
and persistent hypoperfusion. In patients with septic
shock, dobutamine has been shown to increase oxygen
delivery, improve intramucosal acidosis, reduce lactate levels, and enhance microcirculatory recruitment
(441). Although the physiologic rationale for using
inotropes in patients with cardiac dysfunction is intuitive, there are potential harms from excessive vasodilation and tachycardia (441). Importantly, no RCTs have
directly assessed the balance between these potential
benefits and harms in this population.
A network meta-analysis (432) including 33 trials
with 3,470 patients across 16 different comparators
suggested that, in an indirect comparison between
norepinephrine alone and norepinephrine plus dobutamine, dobutamine had an uncertain effect on mortality (OR 0.69; 95% CI, 0.32–1.47, very low-certainty
evidence). Considering the intuitive physiologic
effects, potential benefits from the network metaanalysis, feasibility, acceptability, and negligible cost,
with probably no impact on equity, the panel issued a
conditional recommendation in favor of using inotropes in patients with septic shock and signs of cardiac
dysfunction who are considered, otherwise, adequately
resuscitated. However, given the potential harms from
vasodilation and hypotension, inotropes such as dobutamine should be used in addition to (not as a replacement for) vasopressors.
Several inotropes exist. Dobutamine and epinephrine are commonly used inotropes, yet no highquality evidence supports the superiority of one over
the other. A single randomized, double-blind trial
involving 330 patients across 19F ICUs compared epinephrine vs. norepinephrine plus dobutamine and
44     www.ccmjournal.org

found no difference in 90-day mortality (RR 0.96; 95%
CI, 0.78–1.19, low certainty evidence), ICU LOS, or
vasopressor-free days. The incidence of life-threatening
arrhythmia was similar in both groups. Therefore, consistent with the 2021 SSC guidelines, the panel considered the desirable and undesirable consequences to be
comparable for both drugs and, with both being acceptable and feasible, issued a recommendation to use
either agent for patients with septic shock and cardiac
dysfunction with persistent hypoperfusion despite adequate fluid status and arterial blood pressure. Notably,
epinephrine is widely available in low resource settings,
enhancing feasibility. Milrinone, a phosphodiesterase-3
inhibitor, may improve cardiac function (442).
However, the panel judged the current evidence insufficient to issue a recommendation for dobutamine vs.
milrinone. The recommendation against using levosimendan is carried over from the 2021 SSC guidelines.
“In our practice,” 94.0% of the panel uses inotropes
in adults with septic shock with persistent hypoperfusion and cardiac dysfunction despite adequate fluid
resuscitation and arterial blood pressure. Of these,
31.8% use inotropes often, 44.4% sometimes, and
23.8% rarely. Most of the panel (71.4%) use dobutamine, whereas 12.7% use milrinone, 14.3% uses epinephrine, and none of the panelists use levosimendan.
The factors that drive panel members’ choice of inotropes include details of cardiac dysfunction (31.7%);
heart rate/arrhythmias (27.0%); renal failure (7.9%),
and pulmonary hypertension (7.9%).
Given the high prevalence of cardiac dysfunction
in sepsis, this area remains a research priority. Trials
are urgently needed to assess the impact of inotropes
in sepsis, define which patients benefit, and determine optimal timing, dosing, and weaning strategies.
Ongoing trials (e.g., NCT04166331) are expected to
inform future practice.
Midodrine
63. For adults with septic shock and ongoing
requirement for vasopressors, there
is “insufficient evidence” to make a
recommendation on use of oral midodrine.

New

Need for IV vasopressors is a common indication
for ICU admission, while ongoing need for low-dose
vasopressors may delay transfer out of the ICU when
clinical status is otherwise improving (443, 444). IV
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

vasopressors are associated with adverse events and
traditionally require central venous access (445).
Midodrine, an oral medication with alpha-agonist
properties, has some evidence of benefit in orthostatic
(446) and intradialytic hypotension (447) and therefore may have utility as a vasopressor-sparing agent.
The most comprehensive meta-analysis addressing this question in vasodilatory shock was recently
published and included 7 small RCTs (448). The panel
considered this review, with specific focus on the
septic shock subgroup which was informed by 4 small
RCTs including 180 patients. Pooled analysis from
those with septic shock demonstrated an uncertain
effect of midodrine on mortality, RRT, acute kidney injury, and acute hepatic failure (all very low certainty).
Midodrine may increase vasopressor-free days (MD
0.98 d more; 95% CI, 1.28 fewer to 3.24 more, low certainty evidence) and reduce hospital LOS (MD 0.73 d
fewer; 95% CI, 5.00 fewer to 3.54 more, low certainty
evidence) and ICU LOS (MD 0.8 d fewer; 95% CI, 1.83
fewer to 0.23 more, low certainty).
The panel judged desirable effects to be trivial with
LOS Impacts being Important but uncertain, while
undesirable effects were unknown given the lack
of reporting among included studies. Although the
drug is cheap in most jurisdictions, there were concerns about availability in low resource settings and
the potential impact on equity. Safety and the ability
to reliably maintain target blood pressure were also
concerns. Finally, the panel worried that while midodrine may be acceptable in post-resuscitation shock,
it is perhaps less so in the acute phase, earlier shock
management.
“In our practice,” 32.8% of panel members use
midodrine in adults with septic shock. Among
those who use midodrine, 86.4% use it after the
acute phase of septic shock to facilitate discontinuation of IV vasopressors whereas 9.1% use it in the
early acute phase of mild septic shock to avoid initiating IV vasopressors. Panel members consider its
use for patients with prolonged low-dose IV vasopressor requirements who have otherwise clinically
improved, patients with chronic renal failure, and
patients with cirrhosis.
Ultimately, the panel decided there was insufficient
evidence to make a recommendation but felt this question must be a future research priority given the promising, but non-definitive results from phase II RCTs.
Critical Care Medicine

Beta-Blockers
64. For adults with septic shock, we “suggest
against” using beta-blockers as a treatment for
septic shock.
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: This recommendation is based on evidence
for short-acting, IV beta-blockers (esmolol and
landiolol) prescribed for treatment of septic shock.

New

Although the use of beta-blockers in septic shock
may seem counterintuitive, pre-clinical data suggests
it may improve outcomes (448). The exact mechanism remains unclear, however it may be related to
decreased myocardial workload and optimized myocardial energy efficiency (449). Despite promising animal studies, the RCT data addressing this question
have produced variable results (450–452).
The panel considered the most comprehensive
meta-analysis (453) addressing this question which
was recently published and included 12 RCTs and 1170
patients. Pooled analysis demonstrated an uncertain
effect of beta-blockers on mortality (RR 0.76; 95% CI,
0.62–0.93, very low certainty), bradycardia (RR 3.14;
95% CI, 0.91–10.82, very low certainty), ICU LOS (MD
0.75 d fewer; 95% CI, 3.43 fewer to 1.93 more, very
low certainty), and hospital LOS (MD 1.03 d more;
95% CI, 1.92 fewer to 3.98 more, very low certainty).
Beta-blockers were probably associated with a reduction in new onset tachyarrhythmias (RR 0.37; 95% CI,
0.18–1.78, moderate certainty), but also probably associated with an increased duration of vasopressor use
(MD 1.04 d more; 95% CI, 0.37–1.72 d more, moderate
certainty).
The panel judged both desirable and undesirable
effects to be trivial and given moderate costs associated with IV beta-blockers, variability in their availability (especially of shorter-acting beta-blockers),
and the potential impact on health equity, decided a
conditional recommendation against this intervention was most appropriate. Also factoring into the
panel decision was the very low certainty evidence for
most outcomes of interest, including mortality and
LOS, and an evidence summary informed by mostly
small, single-center RCTs. The role of beta blockers in
sepsis—including the optimal timing of administration, agent selection, and identification of subgroups
most likely to benefit—is a key research priority. Given
www.ccmjournal.org     45

Prescott et al

the promising but preliminary findings from phase
II RCTs, a large, multicenter RCT assessing patientimportant outcomes is warranted to address these critical questions.

RESPIRATORY SUPPORT
Monitoring of Hypoxemia
65. For adults with sepsis, we “suggest” measuring
New
oxygenation by either pulse oximeter (Spo2) or
arterial blood gas (Sao2) in conjunction with
physical examination and clinical acumen.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remarks: Arterial blood gas measurements are
the gold standard for assessing oxygenation;
include other important information such as
pH, Paco2, lactate, and bicarbonate; and are
preferable when available. Spo2/Fio2 by pulse
oximeter may substitute for Pao2/Fio2 ratio, but
is less accurate in patients in shock, with darker
skin tones, and/or with oxygen saturations <
90% or > 97%.

Arterial blood gas (ABG) measurement is the gold
standard for assessing oxygenation, but is invasive,
costly, and not available in all settings. Pulse oximetry
is noninvasive, more universally available, and can
provide continuous monitoring that is easy to interpret, though its accuracy is reduced in low perfusion
states. Measurement of the ratio of arterial oxygen tension (Pao2) to Fio2 (Fio2) is required for the hypoxemia criterion for the diagnosis of acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS). However, a growing body
of evidence also supports the use of the ratio of pulse
oximetry-based measurements such as oxygen saturation (Spo2) to Fio2 for the clinical diagnosis and management of ARDS.
Our recommendation is in part based on a systematic review of 45 observational studies, 30 of
which were in adult patients with acute respiratory
failure, that examined the accuracy of substituting
an Spo2/Fio2 ratio for a Pao2/Fio2 ratio and found
the Spearman correlation co-efficient ranged between 0.5 and 0.8 (454). Furthermore, the Pao2/Fio2
ratio could most often be derived using a simple
linear equation first described by Rice and colleagues (455). However, the correlation is less accurate when oxygen saturations are less than 90%
or greater than 97% (related to the shape of the
46     www.ccmjournal.org

oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve). In addition,
a large single-center study in adult patients in the
United States comparing 48,097 paired oxygenation
values by pulse oximetry and ABG, showed that
Black patients had nearly three times the frequency
of occult hypoxemia compared with White patients
that was not detected by pulse oximetry (456). A
systematic review that examined accuracy of arterial oxygenation by pulse oximetry including 44
studies, reported an overestimation of arterial oxygen saturation (Sao2) by pulse oximetry in patients
with darker skin tones (457). The lower the Sao2, the
greater the degree of overestimation bias. However,
different pulse oximeters models were used in the
included studies and participants’ skin tones were
not measured objectively.
Based on this evidence, the panel issued a conditional recommendation for measuring oxygenation either using pulse oximetry (Spo2) or arterial blood gas
(Sao2) in conjunction with physical examination and
clinical acumen. However, the panel cautioned against
using pulse oximetry for oxygenation measurements
in patients in shock, with darker skin tones, and/or oxygen saturations less than 90% or greater than 97 %
due to its inaccuracies and emphasized that ABG measurements are the gold standard for assessing oxygenation and are preferred when available.
The new global consensus definition of ARDS allows
for the use of pulse oximetry-based measurements for
the diagnosis of ARDS (458). The use of Spo2/Fio2less
than 315 (if Spo2 < 97%) has been suggested for use in
low resource settings when an ABG is unavailable, as
an alternative to Pao2/Fio2 for the diagnosis of ARDS
(mild) in non-intubated patients with ARDS and to categorize the severity in intubated patients with ARDS.
Clinicians should exercise caution substituting a S/F
ratio for a P/F ratio for patients in shock, with darker
skin tones and with oxygen saturations less than 90%
or greater than 97%. In the future, ARDS definitions
may go beyond these syndromic concepts in favor of
treatable traits (459).
The increasing recognition of diagnostic inaccuracy should also spur further clinical research in
this space with consideration of the development of
pulse oximeters that can overcome these inaccuracies. However, until such time, improving equity
in routine ABG testing is paramount to mitigate
occult hypoxemia.
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

Oxygen Targets
66. For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic
New
respiratory failure, we “suggest” titrating Fio2 to
target either higher, more liberal oxygen levels or
lower, conservative oxygen levels depending on
patient factors and resource limitations.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence)
Remark: Although there was variability across trials
informing this recommendation, most used a lower
target of approximately 90–93% Spo2 and a
higher target of Spo2 ≥96.
Remark: “In our practice”, panelists target Spo2
between 90% (IQR 90–92%) to 96% (IQR
94–98%) for patients with sepsis and acute
hypoxemic respiratory failure.

This recommendation is based on 10 RCTs (24,022
patients) reporting 28-day or 90-day mortality (460–
469). Meta-analysis of these trials demonstrated that
lower, conservative oxygen targets may result in little
to no difference in short-term mortality (RR 1.02;
95% CI, 0.99–1.05, translating to 7 more deaths per
1,000 patients, 95% CI, 4 fewer to 18 more, low certainty). There may also be little to no difference in
duration of mechanical ventilation (0.29 more days,
95% CI, 0.76 fewer to 1.34 more, low certainty) or mechanical ventilation free days (1.7 fewer with lower
oxygen targets 95% CI, 5.88 fewer to 2.48 more, low
certainty) but these estimates were each based on one
trial (466, 470). Given the trivial effect size for critical outcomes with lower vs. higher oxygen targets,
lower oxygen targets may result in little to no difference in mortality or other outcomes at the individual
level. However, given the large number of patients
with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, a
small effect size might still have an important population impact. However, in low resource settings where
oxygen therapy or mechanical ventilators are limited,
titrating to lower oxygen targets may be more beneficial overall.
Although the higher, liberal oxygen targets in included trials were similar (generally Spo2 ≥96%), the
lower, conservative oxygen targets varied considerably.
Intermediate oxygen targets (Spo2 94–95%) were not
addressed with this analysis, since few trials targeted
this range. However, one trial (469) found no difference in ventilator free days at 28 days with intermediate
vs. higher oxygen targets (median ventilator-free days
[VFD] 21 d [IQR 0–25] vs. 21 d [IQR 0–26]). The evidence did not provide guidance on whether a precise
Critical Care Medicine

target within the higher oxygen target range (e.g.,
96–97% vs. 98–100%) is optimal. However, the panel
determined that it is reasonable to target the lower end
of the liberal oxygen target range (Spo2 96–97%) or intermediate oxygen targets (Spo2 94–95%) even when
resources are not limited.
This recommendation differs from a recent rapid
practice guideline (471) that suggested against the routine use of higher oxygen targets. In contrast to the
rapid practice guideline, we excluded trials that specifically targeted patients without sepsis, for example,
trials focused on patients with acute exacerbation of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cardiac arrest, stroke, or other acute neurologic injury. In
addition, the SSC guidelines analysis included more
recently published trials (464, 465, 468). A further
analysis done to support this guideline, updating a previous Cochrane meta-analysis (472), revealed no effect
on mortality (RR 1.0 for mortality, 95% CI, 0.95–1.04,
low certainty) when including all trials regardless of
focus on sepsis or not.
The panel acknowledged some patients may benefit
from lower oxygen targets while others may benefit
from higher oxygen targets. Indeed, possible heterogeneity of treatment effect was identified in an individualized treatment effect analysis, where sepsis was
associated with benefit from higher oxygen targets
(473). However, this was a retrospective analysis including a limited number of patients with sepsis (473).
The results from the MEGA-ROX trial which aims to
enroll 40,000 patients will lend greater confidence to
any estimate and provide another opportunity to assess
for heterogeneity of treatment effect for oxygen targets
among patients with sepsis (NCT04092468).
“In our practice,” panelists target Spo2 between 90%
(IQR 90–92%) and 96% (IQR 94–98%) for patients
with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure.
Noninvasive Respiratory Support
67. For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic
New
respiratory failure, we “suggest” using high flow
nasal cannula (HFNC) therapy over conventional
oxygen therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remark: This recommendation pertains to patients
with a Pao2/Fio2 ratio <200 or Spo2/Fio2 ratio
<235.
www.ccmjournal.org     47

Prescott et al

68. For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, we “suggest” using HFNC as the
initial therapy over noninvasive positive pressure
ventilation.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

New

69. For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic
New
respiratory failure, we “suggest” using HFNC over
high flow alternating with noninvasive positive
pressure ventilation.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

Conventional, low-flow oxygen therapy is commonly
administered for treatment of hypoxemia. However, it
cannot deliver a Fio2 exceeding 0.6–0.7 in the upper
airways, even with a non-rebreathing facemask, and
is limited by flow rates of less than or equal to 15 L/
min. Alternatively, high flow nasal cannula (HFNC)
can achieve Fio2 exceeding 0.8–0.9 and deliver flow
rates up to 60 L/min of humidified gas, reducing work
of breathing by mitigating the effect of anatomic dead
space and potentially achieving low levels of positive
airway pressure.
Patients with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure might benefit from noninvasive positive
pressure ventilation (NIPPV) to avoid intubation,
invasive ventilation, and associated complications.
However, HFNC oxygen therapy is easier to apply,
generally more comfortable for the patient, allows for
eating and speaking, and avoids various complications
of NIPPV including increased risk of gastric insufflation, aspiration, and damage to facial skin.
The evidence for suggesting HFNC over conventional oxygen therapy is based on 11 RCTs (3546
patients) and applies to patients with a Pao2/Fio2 ratio
less than 200 or an Spo2/Fio2 ratio less than 235 (474–
484). The evidence for suggesting HFNC over NIPPV
is based on 7 RCTs (2465 patients) (480, 485–490). This
evidence for suggesting HFNC over alternating HFNC
and NIPPV is based on two RCTs (515 patients) (474,
491). The main causes of acute respiratory failure in
the included trials were infections and included trials
focused on COVID-19 and respiratory failure in immunosuppressed patients. Trials focusing on patients
with cardiogenic pulmonary edema or acute exacerbation of COPD were excluded.
In meta-analysis, HFNC therapy resulted in an
uncertain but potential reduction in mortality (RR
0.90; 95% CI, 0.74–1.10, very low certainty); trivial
48     www.ccmjournal.org

reduction in hospital LOS (0.57 d; 95% CI, 1.52 fewer
to 0.37 more, moderate certainty); (475, 477–480, 483,
484); and uncertain but potential increase in VFDs
(2.93 d more; 95% CI, 0.39 more to 5.47 more, very
low certainty), as compared with conventional oxygen
therapy (474, 477, 479, 484). HFNC had an uncertain
but possible reduction in need for intubation (RR 0.88;
95% CI, 0.77–1.00, very low certainty). With exception of hospital LOS (moderate certainty evidence), all
other outcomes (mortality, VFD, and need for intubation) were graded as very low certainty evidence, and
all were down-graded for imprecision. Data on severe
adverse events (RR with HFNC 0.47 (95% CI, 0.22–
1.02, low certainty evidence) were also limited by imprecision. Subgroup analysis in two studies indicated
that the incidence of intubation was lower in patients
with a Pao2/Fio2 less than or equal to 200 mm Hg or
Fio2 greater than 0.6 (474, 480).
In meta-analysis, HFNC was associated with a possible decrease in mortality (RR 0.89; 95% CI, 0.74–1.08,
low certainty) (480, 485–490) and shorter duration of
mechanical ventilation (MD 1.00 d fewer, 95% CI, 1.04
fewer to 0.95 fewer, moderate certainty), as compared
with NIPPV (480, 490). There was no effect on hospital LOS (0.19 d more; 95% CI, 0.45 fewer to 0.83
more, high certainty) (480, 485, 486, 488–490), an uncertain effect on ventilation-free days at 28 d (0.67 d
fewer (95% CI, 1.43 fewer to 0.09 more, very low certainty) (485, 486, 488, 489), and probably no important
effect on the rate of adverse events (7 more per 1000
patients for pneumonia (varied definitions), 95% CI, 4
fewer to 25 more, moderate certainty) (486, 489) and 2
more per 1000 patients for cardiac arrest (9 fewer to 23
more, moderate certainty) (489).
In meta-analysis, HFNC had an uncertain effect on
mortality (RR 0.69, 95% CI, 0.30–1.58, very low certainty) (474, 491), as compared with alternating HFNC
and NIPPV. HFNC was associated with shorter hospital
LOS (MD 2 d fewer, 95% CI, 5.3 fewer to 1.3 more, low
certainty) (491) and more ventilator free days (MD 4 d
more; 95% CI, 1.65 more to 6.35 more, low certainty)
as compared with alternating therapy (474, 491).
The impact on mortality and duration of mechanical
ventilation drove the suggestion of HFNC over conventional oxygen and NIPPV. Furthermore, HFNC appears
safe and may be better tolerated than NIPPV. Indeed,
in the FLORALI trial, respiratory discomfort (as measured by visual analog scale) was lower with HFNC, as
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

compared with NIPPV alternating with HFNC (474).
The panel considered that HFNC probably costs more
than conventional oxygen therapy due to requiring
more disposables and oxygen, but that shorter duration
of mechanical ventilation might result in an important
cost reduction. Both HFNC and NIPPV require disposables, with alternating HFNC and NIPPV requiring
even more. We did not identify any direct data analyzing cost effectiveness. Although stakeholders are likely
to find HFNC acceptable in places where it is available,
incorporation of HFNC into care pathways for patients
with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure
should be weighed against available oxygen supply.
Given its higher oxygen consumption relative to lowflow oxygen therapy modalities (492), HFNC oxygen
therapy might reduce the available oxygen supply and
limit the number of patients who could be treated with
supplemental oxygen therapy. In low resource settings
without HFNC, NIPPV has been suggested as reasonable alternative by an expert Delphi panel (184).
Awake Proning
70. For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic
New
respiratory failure who are not intubated, we
“suggest” a trial of awake proning.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
Remarks: The duration and frequency of proning will
depend on patient tolerance. Sedation should not
be used for the purposes of promoting tolerance
of proning in non-intubated patients.

Awake self-proning has been proposed as a method to
improve oxygenation, reduce work of breathing, optimize ventilation perfusion matching, and potentially
reduce risk of further lung injury among patients with
acute hypoxic respiratory failure (493).
We identified 17 RCTs (3537 patients) to inform
this recommendation (100, 494–509). Awake proning may result in a slight reduction in the requirement
for intubation (RR 0.82, 95% CI, 0.73–0.93, low certainty) (494–500, 503–505, 507, 509). Meta-analysis
yielded uncertain results for most other outcomes
due to indirectness (as all trials focused on patients
with COVID-19) and imprecision. However, point
estimates suggested that awake proning may result in
reduced mortality at 14 days (RR 0.89; 95% CI, 0.64–
1.24, very low certainty) (495, 497, 498, 502, 503, 505–
509), increased hospital-free days (MD 3.6 d more,
Critical Care Medicine

95% CI, 0.95 fewer to 8.15 more, very low certainty)
(494), and increased VFD (MD 0.78 d more, 95% CI,
1.28 d fewer to 2.84 more) (494, 500, 507, 508), but
with wide CIs that could not exclude the possibility
of harm. Furthermore, point estimates suggested that
awake proning may result in increased serious adverse
events (RR 2.54, 95% CI, 0.61—10.58, very low certainty) (494, 496, 498, 499, 503).
Two recently published systematic reviews of awake
proning for COVID-19 patients both found that the
intervention was associated with a reduced need for
intubation and mechanical ventilation (493, 510). In
contrast to our analysis, an individual patient level
meta-analysis also concluded that mortality was
reduced with awake proning (RR 0.70, 95% CI, 0.59–
0.84) (493). However, our evidence synthesis differed
in analytic approach as well as inclusion criteria (RCTs
only; awake proning vs. no proning, no assessment of
proning duration).
Awake proning can be accomplished with minimal cost and appears safe but has been studied only
in patients with COVID-19. These results will be important for another future pandemic, because of the
low cost and wide availability of proning. In addition,
there is considerable equity in low-resource settings
where there may be a shortage of ventilators. Since
the duration of proning depends on patient tolerance
(and patients should not be sedated to achieve proning
when not intubated), we are unable to make a recommendation on the duration of awake proning.
Invasive Mechanical Ventilation
71. For adults with sepsis and ARDS, we
“recommend” using a low tidal volume
ventilation strategy (6 mL/kg) over a high
tidal volume strategy (> 10 mL/kg).
(strong recommendation, high certainty of
evidence)

Carryover

72. For adults with sepsis-associated hypoxNew
emic respiratory failure without ARDS, we
“suggest” using a tidal volume of 6—8 mL/kg
ideal body weight (IBW) over a lower (4 to
< 6 mL/kg IBW) tidal volume.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Patients should be screened regularly
for development of ARDS, as ARDS diagnosis is often missed or delayed in clinical
practice.
www.ccmjournal.org     49

Prescott et al

73. For adults with sepsis and ARDS, we “recommend” using an upper limited goal for
plateau pressure of 30 cm H2o) over higher
plateau pressures.
(strong recommendation, high certainty of
evidence)

Carryover

74. For adults with sepsis and moderate-severe
ARDS, we “suggest” using higher positive
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) over lower
PEEP.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence)

Carryover

75. For adults with sepsis and moderate-severe Carryover
ARDS, we “recommend against” using an
incremental PEEP titration strategy
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of
evidence)
76. For adults with sepsis and moderate-severe Carryover
ARDS, we “suggest” using prone ventilation
for greater than 12 hr daily.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence)
77. For adults with sepsis and moderate-severe
ARDS, we “suggest” using intermittent
NMBA boluses over continuous NMBA
infusion.
(conditional recommendation, moderate
certainty of evidence)

Carryover

Most statements on invasive mechanical ventilation
were carried over, please see 2021 guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
There is a lack of guidance regarding the optimal
tidal volume for mechanically ventilated patients
without ARDS, particularly considering low vs. moderate tidal volumes. We identified two RCTs comparing low (4–6 mL/kg IBW) vs. moderate tidal volumes
(8–10 mL/kg IBW) in general populations of mechanically ventilated critically ill patients, including
those with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and
sepsis, which informed our recommendation (511,
512). Meta-analysis revealed possibly no difference
in mortality at 90 days (RR 1.04; 95% CI, 0.89–1.22),
although CIs could not exclude harm. We similarly
found no important difference between low and
moderate tidal volumes in hospital LOS (MD 0.66 d
shorter; 95% CI, 3.5 d shorter to 2.17 d longer, low
certainty), duration of mechanical ventilation (MD
0.65 d shorter; 95% CI, 1.52 d shorter to 0.23 d longer,
moderate certainty), VFD at day 28 (MD 0.05 d more;
95% CI, 1.34 d fewer to 1.45 d more, very low certainty), and in incidence of ARDS (RR 0.85; 95% CI,
50     www.ccmjournal.org

0.49–1.47, low certainty) and pneumonia (RR 1.10;
95% CI, 0.66–1.82, low certainty) within 7 days of
ICU admission. One trial suggested that there may
be an increased risk for delirium in the lower tidal
volume group (RR 1.19; 95% CI, 0.99–1.42, moderate
certainty) (512).
In practice, clinicians commonly ventilate patients
with moderate tidal volumes not represented in these
two trials (e.g., 7 mL/kg IBW) (513). We advise clinicians to carefully screen their patients for ARDS to
ensure appropriate tidal volumes are used because
under-recognition of ARDS occurs in a significant
proportion (48.7–52.4%) of patients who meet criteria
(514, 515). Even in patients with known ARDS, there
are barriers to maintaining evidence-based mechanical ventilatory strategies and clinicians should ensure
they do not routinely expose patients who are mechanically ventilated to higher tidal volumes (e.g., > 10 mL/
kg IBW) (516, 517).
Given the balance of effects and pragmatic concerns
that ARDS is often under-recognized the panel felt that
recommending lower tidal volumes of 6–8 mL/kg IBW
in adults who are mechanically ventilated for sepsisinduced hypoxemic respiratory failure without ARDS
was the safest approach to prevent volume-induced
lung injuries in those patients who may have early
evolving or unrecognized ARDS.
Venovenous ECMO
78. For adults with severe ARDS due to
sepsis, we “suggest” using veno-venous
ECMO when conventional mechanical
ventilation fails in experienced centers with
infrastructure to support its use.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of
evidence)

Carryover

This statement was carried over, please see the 2021
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).

ADJUNCTIVE THERAPIES FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF SEPSIS
This section of the guideline addresses adjunctive
therapies specifically for the management of sepsis.
Recommendations pertain to the use of therapies for
the management of sepsis. It is recognized that some
of these therapies may be prescribed for reasons other
than sepsis and may continue when a patient has sepsis
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

(e.g., continuation of vitamin D for treatment of preexisting vitamin D deficiency).
IV Corticosteroids
79. For adults with septic shock, we “suggest”
using IV corticosteroids.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Revisited

Corticosteroids have been studied extensively in
adults with multiple types of infection, including
sepsis and septic shock, with a recent meta-analysis
identifying 45 RCTs including 9543 patients (518).
Corticosteroids may result in a small reduction in
28-day mortality (RR 0.92; 95% CI, 0.83–1.01, low
certainty) and long-term mortality at 60 days or
later (RR 0.94; 95% CI, 0.88–1.00, low certainty), although these results are limited by imprecision and
inconsistency, given the heterogeneity of populations and interventions across trials. We a priori
evaluated subgroups based on population (sepsis
vs. septic shock; pneumonia; ARDS) and corticosteroid regimen (with or without mineralocorticoid;
high vs. low dose; short vs. long course; intermittent
vs. continuous infusion). These subgroup analyses
were likely underpowered, but demonstrated similar direction of effect favoring steroids, except for
sepsis without shock (RR 1.09; 95% CI, 0.91–1.31).
Corticosteroids result in a greater incidence of shock
reversal at 7 days (RR 1.29; 95% CI, 1.13–1.46, high
certainty); increases in hyperglycemia (RR 1.19; 95%
CI, 1.10–1.28) and hypernatremia (RR 1.64; 95% CI,
1.32–2.03, moderate certainty); and an uncertain
effect on neuromuscular weakness (RR 1.13; 95%
CI, 0.48–2.65, very low certainty). The panel judged
most patients and clinicians would consider these
potential adverse events to be outweighed by the potential benefits on mortality and shock reversal and
thus made a conditional recommendation favoring IV corticosteroids in patients with septic shock.
Given the widespread availability and low cost of hydrocortisone, this recommendation is also applicable
to low resource settings.
The panel chose not to make separate recommendations for patients with pneumonia or ARDS, acknowledging that while subsets of these populations may
have sepsis, and benefit from corticosteroids, they
are beyond the scope of this guideline and instead
Critical Care Medicine

addressed in other guidelines (392, 519, 520). Our
conditional recommendation for use of corticosteroids in septic shock is consistent with a recent SCCM
guideline on the use of steroids in sepsis, ARDS, and
pneumonia (392).
A recent dose-response meta-analysis (518) of steroids found no increased benefit above 260 mg/day
of hydrocortisone or equivalent, consistent with the
low-dose steroid regimen studied in the largest trial,
ADRENAL (521) (200 mg IV hydrocortisone × 7 d)
and previous SSC guidance (65, 66). “In our practice,” 88.4% of panel member use IV corticosteroids
in patients with septic shock. Among panel members
who use IV corticosteroids, 90% prescribe 200 mg
hydrocortisone-equivalent per 24-hour period, 86%
as intermittent doses rather than as continuous infusion. Timing of steroid initiation was more varied. “In
our practice,” 34% initiate steroids at vasopressor doses
of less than 0.2 µg/kg/min norepinephrine, 38% at
0.2–0.3 µg/kg/min, and 28% at greater than 0.3 µg/kg
minutes; 32% within 2 hours of vasopressor initiation,
34% within 2–4 hours, and 33% more than 4 hours
after vasopressors are started. 63% of the panel never
provides concomitant fludrocortisone; 26% sometimes
does, and only 10% “usually” or “always” provide it.
When given for the sole purpose of septic shock in a
patient who is clinically improving, 61% of panelists
stop steroids without a taper, whereas 39% taper before
discontinuing.
Antipyretics
80. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
New
“suggest against” the use of antipyretic therapy,
either pharmacologic or surface cooling, for the
purpose of improving clinical outcomes.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of
evidence)
Remark: This recommendation does not apply to
using antipyretic therapy for pain control, patient
symptom control, or for patients with other
indications for temperature control, such as neuro
critical care patients or patients after cardiac
arrest.

Fever is a cardinal sign of infection and has been
viewed as both a potentially adaptive and maladaptive
response to infection. In patients with sepsis or septic
shock, it is unclear if antipyretic therapies to treat fever
result in clinical benefit or harm. We used a systematic review of 13 RCTs (522), including a total 3333
www.ccmjournal.org     51

Prescott et al

adults with infection, to evaluate the use of pharmacologic agents (acetaminophen or non-steroidal antiinflammatory agents) and/or surface cooling.
mortality at 28–90 days, with very low certainty due
to imprecision (RR 1.02; 95% CI, 0.86–1.21, very low
certainty). Three trials reported an uncertain effect
on shock reversal at a variety of time points (RR 1.20;
95% CI, 0.84–1.72, very low certainty). Similarly, there
was an uncertain effect on LOS (MD –0.12 d; 95% CI,
0.72–0.49, very low certainty).
Given the additional work required for fever control
(e.g., medication administration, cooling blankets, etc)
and the absence of clinical benefit, the panel made a
conditional recommendation against the use of antipyretic therapy for the purposes of temperature control. The panel made a remark supporting the use of
these techniques for symptom control, recognizing
that many patients may be uncomfortable with fever
and benefit from these therapies for symptom management. The trade-off of symptomatic treatment is that
worsening or new fever and infection may be missed,
potentially delaying diagnoses. The patient panel
agreed with this assessment, noting that for patients
with severe infection, missed diagnoses from masking fever would be worse than foregoing symptomatic
treatment of fever, but that this decision would need to
be made on a case-by-case basis.
IV Vitamin C
81. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“suggest against” using IV vitamin C in
patients with sepsis or septic shock.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Revisited

We updated two previous systematic reviews (523, 524)
and identified 6 additional trials (525–530) for a total
of 55 RCTs evaluating IV vitamin C as monotherapy
or in combination with thiamin and corticosteroids.
Many trials were small, single-center, and at high risk
of bias. We found possibly no difference in mortality at
90 days, reported in 7 RCTs at low risk of bias (RR 1.06;
95% CI, 0.95–1.18, low certainty evidence). among trials reporting mortality at a shorter endpoint (28–30 d),
we found a significant subgroup effect, with low risk of
bias trials not demonstrating an effect (RR 0.97; 95%
CI, 0.82–1.13) and high risk of bias trials suggesting a
reduction in mortality (RR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.58–0.92),
52     www.ccmjournal.org

p value for subgroup differences 0.05. There may be a
trivial reduction in the duration of vasopressors (MD
18.7 hr; 95% CI, –25.25 to –12.11 hr, low certainty),
and certainty of evidence for all outcomes was low or
very low. Although the included studies demonstrated
a low risk of adverse events, IV vitamin C can result in
factitious hyperglycemia, and the largest trial (LOVIT)
proactively modified glucose monitoring strategies to
avoid this risk (531). Given the lack of an impact on
mortality seen in the low risk of bias trials, the panel
made a conditional recommendation against the use
of IV vitamin C in sepsis. It is unlikely that small,
single-center RCTs, or studies using similar doses to
those already evaluated will result in practice changing evidence on this topic. Despite the current body
of evidence, patient representatives to the guidelines
panel indicated enthusiasm about ongoing research on
vitamin C at different duration or dosage.
IV Immunoglobulin (IVIG)
82. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
Revisited
“suggest against” using IV immunoglobulins.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

We did not identify any new large RCTs evaluating IV
immunoglobulin (IVIG) in sepsis or septic shock since
the 2021 guidelines (532). In addition to IgM-enriched
vs. non-enriched IgM, we also evaluated subgroups of
high vs. low dose IVIG. Please see the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Blood Purification
83. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
Revisited
“suggest against” using blood purification
techniques, including hemoperfusion, highdose hemofiltration, or plasma exchange.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
84. For adults with sepsis or septic shock
we “suggest against” using polymyxin B
hemoperfusion.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)

Carryover

Blood purification has been proposed and studied
as an adjunctive therapy for sepsis. The rationale for
this therapy is to modulate the host immune response
by removing excess inflammatory mediators (e.g.,
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

inflammatory cytokines or lipopolysaccharides) and/
or restoring deficient plasma proteins, thereby improving clinical outcomes by mitigating the manifestations
of a dysfunctional immune response (533–535).
We updated existing systematic reviews of blood purification techniques, which included RCTs of hemoperfusion/hemadsorption (41 RCTs), hemofiltration
(26 RCTs), and plasmapheresis (4 RCTs) (534, 535).
Despite many RCTs, we are uncertain of the impact
of blood purification on mortality. Although there is a
signal for a reduction in short-term mortality (28–30
d) with all three techniques (hemoperfusion RR 0.83;
95% CI, 0.71–0.98, low certainty; hemofiltration RR
0.61; 95% CI, 0.61–0.90, low certainty; plasmapheresis RR 0.64; 95% CI, 0.46–0.89, low certainty), the
certainty of evidence is low due to varying factors for
each technique (hemoperfusion–inconsistency, imprecision; hemofiltration–risk of bias, inconsistency; and
plasmapheresis- very serious imprecision). Few trials
report on longer-term mortality outcomes for hemoperfusion (four RCTs) and hemofiltration (five RCTs),
and these do not demonstrate a beneficial effect for
hemoperfusion (RR 1.11; 95% CI, 0.94–1.30, low certainty) or hemofiltration (RR 0.93; 95% CI, 0.78–1.11,
very low certainty). There are inconsistent findings
suggestive of benefit in non-mortality outcomes. There
are many potential reasons for inconsistency across
studies, including differences in study quality and impact on co-treatment (e.g., anticoagulation dosing,
antimicrobial dosing, absorption of norepinephrine
by the blood purification technique). The earliest trials, including some with the largest effects, are over
20 years old and provide sepsis care inconsistent with
current standards (536, 537). The panel reviewed subgroup analyses based upon mechanism (endotoxin
absorption vs. inflammatory mediators) and did not
find sufficient evidence to provide a separate recommendation. The substantial resource requirements and
impacts upon health equity of these treatments in the
absence of clear benefit led to a conditional recommendation against any of these therapies.
There is an important need for more research to
identify sepsis phenotypes which may benefit from
blood purification treatments (e.g., cutoff levels of
lipopolysaccharide or inflammatory markers), and
rigorous trials with high-quality ancillary care to ensure the blood purification technique is delivered consistently, safely, and effectively. Rigorous, multicenter
Critical Care Medicine

RCTs are needed to explore this important area of
sepsis research; small single-center RCTs are unlikely
to result in practice-changing evidence. There are ongoing trials meeting these criteria, such as the Tigris
RCT, NCT03901807 (538). The Tigris RCTs is evaluating Polymyxin B Hemoperfusion in a specific subpopulation of patients with septic shock (endotoxin
activity assay 0.60–0.89 units and multi-organ failure),
informed by an exploratory post hoc analysis of the
EUPHRATES RCT suggesting potential benefit in this
subpopulation (533, 538, 539).
Vitamin D
85. For adults with sepsis and septic shock, we
“suggest against” using Vitamin D therapy for
sepsis treatment.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of
evidence)
Remark: This recommendation does not pertain to
patients who are on lower doses of Vitamin D
supplement for other indication or receiving it as
part of standard nutritional practice.

New

Preclinical data suggest that vitamin D has immunomodulatory properties and is essential for lung function (540). Vitamin D has thus been proposed and
tested as a therapy to improve outcomes in critically ill
patients (540).
We updated an existing systematic review of vitamin D therapy in sepsis, including 11 RCTs (541).
There are uncertain effects of vitamin D therapy on
mortality (RR 0.84; 95% CI, 0.68, 1.04, from 9 trials of 2003 patients, very low certainty), duration of
mechanical ventilation (MD –3.74; 95% CI, –9.18 to
1.70; from 1 trial of 50 patients, very low certainty),
and ICU LOS (MD –4.94; 95% CI, –8.28 to –1.59;
from 7 trials of 819 patients, very low certainty) in
patients with sepsis. Evidence was rated down for
risk of bias in the included studies, inconsistency
of results, indirectness of data (including studies
of general ICU patients), and imprecision. Vitamin
D therapy may have little to no impact on adverse
events including hypercalcemia (RR 1.30; 95% CI,
0.59, 2.83; from 1 trial of 1036 patients, low certainty) and renal stones (RR 0.14; 95% CI, 0.01, 2.76;
from 1 trial of 1014 patients, low certainty) (540).
In the VIOLET trial, the subgroup of patients with
sepsis (350 patients) had a higher 90 mortality risk
with high-dose (540,000 international units) enteral
www.ccmjournal.org     53

Prescott et al

vitamin D supplementation (absolute risk increase
12.4%; 95% CI, 3.2–21.6%) (540). Given the very low
certainty of evidence, the balance of undesirable and
desirable effects, and the subgroup analysis in the
VIOLET trial of patients with sepsis suggesting possible harm, the panel made a conditional recommendation against the vitamin D therapy for sepsis. The
panel noted this recommendation does not pertain
to patients who are on lower doses of vitamin D supplementation for other indications, or standard-dose
vitamin D supplementation for treatment of vitamin
D deficiency.

the world, resulting in indirectness. Lastly, there are
substantial feasibility issues as XueBiJing is not available in most countries, and a route to approval of an
IV herbal injection in many jurisdictions is unclear.
How the medication would interact with other therapies commonly used in other healthcare systems (e.g.,
corticosteroids), is unclear. More research to evaluate
XueBiJing’s effects, including adverse events, in other
settings would be required to provide adequate external validation before a recommendation could be
made for more widespread use. This is a future research priority.

IV XueBiJing

ADDITIONAL SUPPORTIVE
THERAPIES IN PATIENTS WITH
SEPSIS

86. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“suggest against” using XueBiJing injection
outside of jurisdictions where it has regulatory
approval.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

New

XueBiJing is an herbal product (containing Carthami
Flos, Paeoniae Radix Rubra, Chuanxiong Rhizoma,
Salviae Miltiorrhizae Radix et Rhizoma, and Angelicae
Sinensis Radix) that was licenced in 2004 for treatment
of sepsis in China (542). XueBiJing has several potential mechanisms of action against sepsis including
antagonistic effects on endotoxin and inflammatory
mediators (542).
We updated two systematic reviews (543, 544) of
XueBiJing in severe infection, identifying a total of 30
RCTs, of which only 22 could be located. Although
the evidence suggests that XueBiJing injection may
result in a large reduction in mortality at 28–30 days
(RR 0.68; 95% CI, 0.45–1.32, low certainty), as well
as moderate-to-large improvements in important outcomes, such as ICU LOS (MD 3.16 d fewer; 95% CI,
4.56 d fewer to 1.77 d fewer, low certainty), the panel
had substantial concerns about risk of bias in many
included studies and the applicability of the evidence
to general sepsis populations outside of China, where
all trials where conducted. The two largest highquality RCTs (542, 545) demonstrate high control
group mortality rates despite recruiting relatively nonsick populations (53% and 62% of patients ventilated;
with 28-d mortality rates of 26% and 25%, respectively), and a low use of steroids (~14%) (542, 545).
These data suggest the included trials populations may
be different from those treated in other ICUs around
54     www.ccmjournal.org

This section of the guideline addresses additional therapies that are pertinent to patients with sepsis but are
not prescribed specifically for the treatment of sepsis.
Stress Ulcer Prophylaxis
87. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, and
Revisited
who have risk factors for GI bleeding, we
“suggest” using stress ulcer prophylaxis with
proton-pump inhibitors over not using stress
ulcer prophylaxis.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty
of evidence)

We updated an existing systematic review (546) with
12 RCTs, including the 2024 REVISE trial (547), which
evaluated the impact of proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs)
on clinically important gastrointestinal bleeding. PPIs
reduced the risk of clinically-important gastrointestinal bleeding (9 trials; RR 0.48; 95% CI, 0.30–078,
moderate certainty), with an uncertain effect on mortality (12 trials; RR 0.99; 95% CI, 0.93–1.05, very low
certainty), C. difficile infection (6 trials; RR 0.19; 95%
CI, 0.75–1.87, very low certainty), duration of mechanical ventilation (7 trials; MD 1.46 d more; 95% CI,
1.47 fewer to 4.39 more, very low certainty) and pneumonia (8 trials; RR 1.00; 95% CI, 0.92–1.09, very low
certainty). Evidence was rated down for indirectness
as the trials did not specifically examine patients with
sepsis or septic shock. The panel suggested the use of
PPIs for stress ulcer prophylaxis in adults with sepsis
and septic shock at risk for clinically important bleeding. A recent systematic review suggests that the most
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

important risk factors for clinically important bleeding
include acute kidney injury, male gender, coagulopathy, shock, and chronic liver failure (548). The panel
noted that there may be an interaction between enteral
nutrition and risk of clinically important bleeding. The
use of enteral nutrition was reported in 8 trials; future studies should examine the need for stress ulcer
prophylaxis in enterally fed patients who do not have
other risk factors for stress ulcer related bleeding.
Since stress ulcer prophylaxis is widespread available and requires few resources, this recommendation
is applicable to low resource settings. In the absence of
PPIs, H2 receptor antagonists are a reasonable alternative (549).
This 2024 SCCM and American Society of HealthSystem Pharmacists Guideline for the Prevention of
Stress-Related Gastrointestinal Bleeding in Critically
Ill Adults suggests use of stress ulcer prophylaxis to
prevent clinically important bleeding (550). However,
in contrast to this guideline, it suggests use of either
PPIs of H2 receptor antagonists as first-line. We focused our PICO question on PPIs because prior network meta-analysis (550) suggested that PPIs are
superior to HR receptor antagonists at preventing clinically important bleeding (RR 0.53; 95% CI, 0.34–0.83)
and most recent trials examining stress ulcer prophylaxis (e.g., SUPICU, PEPTIC, REVISE) (547, 551, 552)
have used PPIs.
Probiotics
88. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“suggest against” using probiotics.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of
evidence)

New

The microbiome (millions of microorganisms that live
on and within humans) performs essential functions
contributing to health, immune function, and digestion
(553, 554). Microbial dysbiosis is common in critical
illness, including sepsis (553, 554). Microbiome health
and clinical outcomes might therefore be improved
with priobiotic therapy (live microorganisms) or symbiotic therapy (combination of live microorganisms
and prebiotics, substrates that promote growth of
healthy bacteria) (553, 554).
There are over 65 RCTs evaluating probiotics or
symbiotics in the ICU, including over 20 different
bacterial species alone or in combination (555). We
Critical Care Medicine

identified 41 RCTs that evaluated mortality, finding probiotics may have little to no impact on mortality (RR 0.95; 95% CI, 0.87–1.04, low certainty). The
effects of probiotics on VAP (18 RCTs RR 0.67; 95%
CI, 0.54–0.83, very low certainty) and duration of invasive mechanical ventilation (12 RCTs; MD 3.28 d
fewer; 95% CI, 5.67–0.90 d fewer; very low certainty)
were uncertain but point estimates suggested potential benefit. However, when restricted to trials at
low risk of bias, including the large PROSPECT trial
(556), these improvements were no longer observed.
Compounding this uncertainty is the indirectness
of the populations studied (only a minority of studies were patients with sepsis, most were general ICU
populations), and wide variety of potential probiotic/
symbiotic regimens to choose from. Overall, the panel
was uncertain as to the effect of probiotics in sepsis;
given the lack of benefit seen in the low risk of bias
trials, the panel made a conditional recommendation
against the use of probiotics. Future trials of different
organisms, in sepsis-specific populations, and in the
recovery phase of sepsis may help to inform future
recommendations.
Active Fluid Removal
89. For adults with septic shock after the acute
resuscitation phase, we “suggest” using active
fluid removal.
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty
evidence).
Remark: Acute resuscitation refers to escalating
doses of vasopressors, ongoing high doses
of vasopressors, or needing ongoing volume
expansion. Active fluid removal refers to diuretics
and, if diuretics are insufficient, ultrafiltration
or extracorporeal fluid removal. Factors to be
considered when deciding to initiate active
fluid removal include cardiorespiratory function;
vasopressor dose; clinical course; peripheral
edema; weight; and fluid balance.

New

Fluid overload in patients with sepsis and septic shock
can lead to tissue edema, impaired oxygen delivery,
and organ dysfunction and is associated, in observational studies, with increased mortality (557). The
management of fluid balance appears to be important, therefore, particularly in the “evacuation” or “deescalation” phase of resuscitation (558, 559). Recent
RCTs have explored the efficacy of active fluid removal
and de-resuscitation strategies.
www.ccmjournal.org     55

Prescott et al

We considered a recent meta-analysis (560) consisting of 13 RCTs (368, 372, 561–571) (2,517 patients), of
which 10 RCTs (372, 563–571) (2,239 patients) assessed
de-resuscitation strategies with diuretics only, 3 RCTs
(368, 561, 562) assessed de-resuscitation strategies with
diuretics plus ultrafiltration; 3 RCTs (368, 372, 562) (184
patients) focused specifically on patients sepsis).
Across all critically ill patients, the pooled analysis
demonstrated an uncertain effect of active fluid removal on mortality (RR 0.92, 95% CI, 0.81–1.04, very
low certainty), with the use of diuretics only (RR 0.89,
95% CI, 0.78–1.01) having a potentially more favorable
effect than the use of diuretics with or without RRT
(RR 1.13; 95% CI, 0.83–1.53). The pooled effects on
receipt of RRT (RR 0.83, 95% CI, 0.64–1.08, very low
certainty), ICU LOS (MD 0.3 d longer; 95% CI, 1.07
shorter to 1.66 longer, very low certainty), vasopressor
free-days (MD 0.30 d shorter; 95% CI, 4.25 shorter
to 3.64 longer, very low certainty), and health-related
quality of life (MD 0.1 units higher; 95% CI, 0.13 lower
to 0.33 higher, very low certainty) were likewise uncertain, and the effect on ischemic complications could
not be estimated. Mortality among the subgroup of
sepsis patients was also uncertain (RR 1.33, 95% CI,
0.75–2.34, very low certainty). Our suggestion for
active fluid removal was influenced input from patient
representatives to the SSC guidelines, who placed a
high value on avoiding edema.
Our suggestion to use active fluid removal after the
acute resuscitation phase in septic shock is consistent
with the ESICM Clinical Practice Guideline (560)
on fluid therapy in adult critically ill patients which
suggests protocolized fluid removal by diuretics but
against the routine use of ultrafiltration or extracorporeal fluid removal without other indication for RRT in
a general critically ill population.
Future research is needed to address this question
specifically in patients with sepsis.
Blood Transfusion
90. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
Carryover
“recommend” using a restrictive transfusion
strategy over a liberal transfusion strategy.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of
evidence)

This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
56     www.ccmjournal.org

Enteral Nutrition
91. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“suggest” early (within 72 h) initiation of
enteral nutrition.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
of evidence)

Carryover

This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Insulin Therapy
92. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“recommend” initiating insulin therapy at a
glucose level of ≥180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L)
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of
evidence)

Carryover

This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Renal Replacement Therapy
93. For adults with sepsis or septic shock and
Carryover
acute kidney injury, with no definitive indication
for renal replacement therapy, we “suggest
against” using renal replacement therapy.
(conditional recommendation, moderate
certainty of evidence)
94. For adults with sepsis or septic shock
Carryover
and acute kidney injury warranting renal
replacement therapy, we “suggest” either
continuous or intermittent renal replacement
therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of
evidence)

These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Sodium Bicarbonate
95. For adults with septic shock and
Carryover
hypoperfusion-induced lactic acidemia, we
“suggest against” using sodium bicarbonate
therapy to improve hemodynamics or to
reduce vasopressor requirements.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of
evidence)
96. For adults with septic shock, severe
metabolic acidemia (pH ≤7.2), and acute
kidney injury (AKIN score 2 or 3), we
“suggest” using sodium bicarbonate therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
of evidence)

Carryover

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

These statements were carried over, please see the 2021
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis
97. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
Carryover
“recommend” using pharmacologic venous
thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis unless a
contraindication exists.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of
evidence)
98. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“recommend” using low molecular weight
heparin over unfractionated heparin for VTE
prophylaxis
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of
evidence)

Carryover

99. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
we “suggest” using pharmacological VTE
prophylaxis alone over pharmacological
VTE prophylaxis plus mechanical VTE
prophylaxis.
(conditional recommendation, moderate
certainty of evidence)

Carryover

These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).

GOALS OF CARE
Goals of Care Discussions
100. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
Carryover
clinicians should discuss goals of care and
prognosis with patients and/or families.
(good practice statement)
101. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we
“suggest” addressing goals of care early
(within 72 h) over late (72 h or later)
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of
evidence)

Carryover

These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Standardized Criteria to Trigger Goals of Care
Discussions
102. For adult patients with sepsis or septic
shock, there is “insufficient evidence” to
issue a recommendation regarding the
use of a specific standardized criterion
to identify patients for goals of care
discussions.

Critical Care Medicine

Revisited

Goals of care (GoC) discussions are crucial to patientcentered care, especially in serious or life-threatening
conditions like sepsis. Although some patients opt
for all available medical interventions, others may
seek limitations based on prognosis, invasiveness of
interventions, and anticipated quality of life. GoC discussions help ensure treatment decisions align with
patients’ values and preferences. As many patients have
not previously documented their GoC preferences,
proactive discussions are critical.
In a recent cohort study of over 18,000 patients hospitalized with sepsis, GoC discussions did not occur
consistently during hospitalization and there was
marked variation in practice across hospitals (572).
Observational studies have reported on the use of electronic medical record, machine learning, and natural
language processing to assess GoC documentation and
timing (573, 574). However, a standardized approach
to trigger GoC discussions remains unclear.
We identified one non-randomized, before-after
pilot study (575) with 84 patients, in which the intervention involved informing the treating hospitalist of
the patient’s predicted 30-day mortality on hospital
day two to promote early GoC discussion. The impact of intervention on GoC discussion was uncertain
(GoC discussion occurred in16.7% of patients in intervention arm vs. 4.8% in the usual care arm, RR 3.50;
95% CI, 0.77–15.88, very low certainty) (575).
Due to limited evidence and inability to determine
resource requirements or care equity, the panel made
no recommendation on specific standardized criteria
to identify patients for GoC discussions. Although we
cannot recommend specific standardized criteria, patient representatives to the SSC guidelines advocated
that GoC be discussed and addressed in a transparent,
explicit, and authentic manner.
Advanced Directives
103. Health systems should implement strategies
to ensure that patients being discharged from
hospital after sepsis or septic shock have the
opportunity to execute advanced directives.
(good practice statement)

New

104. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
there is “insufficient evidence” to issue
a recommendation on the systematic
establishment of advanced care directives
before hospital discharge.

New

www.ccmjournal.org     57

Prescott et al

Advanced care directives document patient’s wishes
regarding life-sustaining treatments, providing clear,
formal guidance to healthcare providers and family
members when the patient cannot communicate or
make decisions. These directives typically address a
range of medical interventions and help ensure that
healthcare decisions are made in alignment with
the patient’s values, even in the event of incapacity.
Although advanced care directives can provide valuable clarity and prevent unwanted or non-concordant
treatments, there is insufficient evidence to determine
whether the systematic establishment of such directives, particularly before hospital discharge, leads to
better patient or family outcomes.
The systematic implementation of GoC discussions,
conducted alone or as part of multicomponent palliative care or ethics interventions, has been studied in
three RCTs, one cluster RCT, and three observational
studies of patients with serious illness (including,
but not limited to, patients with sepsis) (576–581).
The evaluated intervention probably led to increased
changes in code status (one trial; RR, 2.15; 95% CI,
1.44–3.21, moderate certainty) (580) and may have
led to increased GoC discussions (one trial; RR 1.24;
95% CI, 1.01–1.54, low certainty). The panel found
these findings supportive of value-concordant care,
even though GoC conversations, their perceived value,
and implementation vary across regions and healthcare systems due to differing sociocultural norms and
medical practices. Nonetheless, the panel assessed the
evidence to be of very low certainty, so we could not
generate a recommendation regarding systematically
discussing and establishing advanced care directives
before hospital discharge. The panel judged this to be
an important issue and that health systems should implement strategies to ensure that patients can execute
advanced care directives if they wish.
Time-Limited Trials
105. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
New
there is “insufficient evidence” to issue a
recommendation regarding formal time-limited
trials (TLTs) of critical care.
Remark: A TLT is a collaborative plan to use lifesustaining therapy for a defined duration, after
which response to therapy informs the decision as
to whether to continue or escalate curative intent
ICU care or to instead focus care on other goals.

58     www.ccmjournal.org

A time-limited trial (TLT) is an approach to communication and decision-making that complements
other methods of prognostic communication and
shared decision-making (582). A TLT has been defined as “a collaborative plan among clinicians and
a patient and/or their surrogate decision maker(s)
to use life-sustaining therapy for a defined duration, after which the patient’s response to therapy
informs the decision as to whether to continue or escalate curative intent ICU care or to instead focus on
care with other goals” (583). ICU care is sometimes
delivered discordantly with patient’s treatment preferences (584), due to avoidance of prognostication,
stemming from uncertainty about treatment responsiveness or clinical inertia (585). TLTs may help align
care with treatment preferences and limit intensity of
treatment.
We identified one before-after study that assessed the
impact of TLTs on relevant outcomes. In this 3-center
study performed in one city, clinicians were trained to
perform daily assessments to identify patients at risk
for potentially nonbeneficial treatments due to advanced illness. TLTs were the default communication
and care-planning approach used in family meetings
for these patients. During the intervention period,
TLTs increased, as did high-quality family meetings.
This change in practice was associated with a possible
increase in “do not resuscitate” orders (RR 1.27; 95%
CI, 1.10–1.45, low certainty), a possible reduction in
ICU LOS (MD 2.9 d shorter, 4.89 d shorter to 0.91 d
shorter, low certainty), and an unclear impact on hospital mortality (RR 1.00; 95% CI, 0.79–1.26, very low
certainty) (586).
Although this study suggested some desirable
outcomes with TLTs, the non-randomized design,
small sample size, and concerns about whether the
intervention truly reflected formal TLTs (vs. simply
earlier GoC discussions) led the panel to conclude
there was insufficient evidence to issue a recommendation. “In our practice,” 64% of the panel uses
TLTs (specifically: use life-sustaining therapy for a
defined duration, after which the patient’s response
to therapy informs the decision to continue care
directed toward recovery, transition to care focused
exclusively on comfort, or extend the trial’s duration), and among these, 64% “sometimes” and 27%
“always” explicitly discuss the use of TLTs with the
patient or surrogate decision maker.
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

The panel noted that the effects of integrating
formal TLTs likely depend on the quality of communication and shared decision-making to which they are
added—existing care may include practices functionally equivalent to TLTs. The panel further noted there
is evidence of inequity in how ICU clinicians interact
with minoritized populations (587, 588), and that if
done poorly, or if imposed without effective shared
decision-making, TLTs could worsen care and inequity. Additional research is needed to determine the
impact of TLTs, to guide individualization of TLTs,
on training clinicians to discuss TLTs with patients
and surrogates, and on implementing consistent TLT
hand-offs between ICU clinicians.
Palliative Care
106. The principles of palliative care (which
may include palliative care consultation
based on clinician judgement) should be
integrated into the treatment plan, when
appropriate, to address patient and family
symptoms and suffering.
(good practice statement)

Carryover

107. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
we “suggest against” routine formal
palliative care consultation for all patients
over palliative care consultation based on
clinician judgement.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of
evidence)

Carryover

These statements were carried over, please see the 2021
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).

TRANSITIONS OF CARE
In-Hospital Transitions
108. For adults with sepsis and septic shock
Carryover
admitted to ICU, we “suggest” using a
critical care transition program, compared
with usual care, upon transfer to the floor.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)
109. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
Carryover
we “suggest” using a handoff process of
critically important information at transitions
of care over no such handoff process.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Critical Care Medicine

Screening for Economic and Social Support
110. Hospitals and health systems should
Carryover
screen patients with sepsis or septic shock
for economic and social support needs
(including housing, nutritional, financial,
and spiritual support), and make referrals
where available to meet these needs.
(good practice statement)

This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Medication Reconciliation
111. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
comprehensive medication reconciliation
should be performed at transitions in care,
including at ICU and hospital discharge.
(good practice statement)

Revisited

112. For adults with sepsis or septic shock,
we “suggest” comprehensive medication
reconciliation using a pharmacist-based
approach at transitions in care.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty
evidence)

Revisited

Routine transitions in care among patients with sepsis
increase risk of polypharmacy and inappropriate medications. The panel generated a good practice statement on the importance of comprehensive medication
reconciliation whenever a patient transitions from one
setting to another.
Regarding a pharmacist-led approach to medication
reconciliation at transitions in care, the panel considered two (589, 590) before-and-after studies that included 658 patients comparing a pharmacist-based
interventions to usual care. These studies used either
pharmacy-based electronic hand off tool or a computerassisted pharmacy work list to reduce continued prescription of atypical antipsychotics and proton pump
inhibitors (pantoprazole) initiated in the ICU. The intervention may reduce prescription of antipsychotics
at ICU transfer (RR 0.84; 95% CI, 0.75–0.94, low certainty) and PPIs at hospital discharge (RR 0.16; 95% CI,
0.09–0.30, low certainty) compared with usual care.
The panel judged that there were large desirable
effects, the balance of effects favors the intervention,
and the intervention will be acceptable and probably feasible. Such pharmacy review may already be a
quality-of-care metric in some healthcare systems. Costs may be moderate but there are no
www.ccmjournal.org     59

Prescott et al

cost-effectiveness studies. The availability of pharmacy
support may be limited in low resource settings.
Hospital Discharge Planning
113. Clinical teams should provide adults with
sepsis or septic shock and their families
the opportunity to participate in shared
decision making in post-ICU and hospital
discharge planning to ensure discharge
plans are acceptable and feasible.
(good practice statement)

Carryover

114. For adult survivors of sepsis or septic
shock and their families, clinicians should
provide information about the hospital
stay, sepsis and related diagnoses, treatments, and common impairments after
sepsis in the written and verbal discharge
summary.
(good practice statement)

Carryover

115. For adults with sepsis or septic shock
Carryover
who developed new impairments, hospital
discharge plans should include follow-up
with clinicians able to support and manage new and long-term sequelae.
(good practice statement)
116. Healthcare systems should implement
strategies to ensure that patients, their
families, and their primary care providers
are provided with adequate information to
navigate the transition out of hospital.
(good practice statement)

New

117. For adults who survive hospitalization
with sepsis or septic shock, there is
insufficient evidence to issue a
recommendation regarding a specific
structured multi-component discharge
planning process.

Revisited

Several of these statements were carried over, please
see the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Patients with sepsis and their families often experience several transitions in care before discharge home.
Discharge planning, including comprehensive summaries and medication reconciliation are potential
strategies to assure safe transition from acute care, and
can provide patients and families with an overview of
sepsis-related issues.
The panel completed a meta-analysis of 3 RCTs (591–
593) that included a total of 592 patients comparing
multi-component discharge planning protocols to usual
care. Only one study (593) specifically studied sepsis survivors. comprehensive discharge planning may improve
60     www.ccmjournal.org

distressing patient symptom of pain (SMD –0.16; 95%
CI, –0.36 to 0.03, low certainty), post-traumatic stress
(SMD –0.16; 95% CI, –0.37 to 0.04, low certainty), and
hospital readmissions (RR 0.14; 95% CI, 0.02–1.14, low
certainty), with an uncertain impact on anxiety, with a
point estimate favoring usual care (SMD 0.19; 95% CI,
–0.09 to 0.47, very low certainty).
The panel considered that while the balance of
effects, acceptability, and the equity impact probably
favors the intervention, the certainty of evidence was
low, there are moderate costs associated with the intervention, and implementation may not always be
feasible. The specific components of the interventions
in each RCT were highly variable. As such, we were
unable to generate a recommendation regarding a specific structured multi-component discharge planning
process. However, the panel assessed that healthcare
systems should ensure that patients, families, and their
primary care clinicians are provided with adequate information to navigate the transition from hospital to
community care.
Education of Patients and Families on Sepsis
118. For adult survivors of sepsis or septic
Carryover.
shock and their families, clinicians should
provide information about the hospital stay,
sepsis and related diagnoses, treatments,
and common impairments after sepsis in
the written and verbal discharge summary.
(good practice statement)
119. For adults with sepsis and septic shock Carryover
and their families, we “suggest” offering
written and verbal sepsis education
(diagnosis, treatment, post-ICU/sepsis
syndrome) before hospital discharge and
in the follow-up setting.
(conditional recommendation, very low
certainty evidence)

These statements were carried over, see the 2021 guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Education of PCPs on Sepsis
120. Health systems should implement strategies
to ensure clinicians have the knowledge
and competency to support sepsis survivors
and their families during the post-hospital
recovery.
(good practice statement)

New

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

121. There is “insufficient evidence” to issue a
recommendation regarding providing sepsisfocused educational material to primary care
providers as compared with usual care.

New

Sepsis survivors are discharged to PCPs to manage various comorbidities and sequelae after sepsis. PCP knowledge of short- and long-term consequences of sepsis
may be important help manage ongoing symptoms and
disabilities. One unblinded RCT (SMOOTH) included
291 sepsis survivors from 9 ICUs examined the effect of
a 12-month primary care management intervention on
short-term (6-mo) and long-term (24-mo) outcomes
(593). The multicomponent intervention included proactive symptom monitoring, clinical decision support
for PCPs, and training for patients, nurses, and PCPs on
evidence-based post-sepsis care. The trial did not show an
improvement in mental health-related quality of life at 6
or 12 months (593). The panel determined that we cannot
issue a recommendation on providing educational material to PCPs due to insufficient evidence. The panel also
noted that implementing PCP education would require
resources and costs, limiting use in low resource settings.
The patient panel emphasized the importance of educating patients and families about sepsis and that patients
and families can anticipate benefits from educating practitioners with limited exposure to survivors of sepsis or
septic shock following discharge.
Overall, there is insufficient evidence to suggest any
specific approach to educating primary care providers. Nonetheless, it is important that health systems
attempt to improve awareness of post-sepsis sequelae
among clinicians caring for patients after sepsis.
Further studies are warranted to identify types of educational programs, evaluate acceptability, assess knowledge retention among practitioners, and determine
fidelity of the intervention.
Post-Discharge Care Coordination
122. Health systems should implement
strategies to support sepsis survivors
and their families during the post-hospital
recovery.
(good practice statement)

New

123. There is “insufficient evidence” to make
a recommendation on early post-hospital
discharge follow-up vs. routine posthospital discharge follow-up.

Revisited

Critical Care Medicine

We did not identify any new studies since the 2021
SSC guidelines evaluating the impact of timing of
follow-up on clinical outcomes. Please see the 2021
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).

LONG-TERM OUTCOMES AND
RECOVERY
Post-hospital Evaluation and Management
124. Health systems should facilitate
assessment and follow-up for physical,
cognitive, and emotional problems after
hospital discharge for sepsis or septic
shock.
(good practice statement)

Carryover

125. For adult survivors of hospitalization for
sepsis or septic shock, we “suggest”
offering post critical illness follow-up
services.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Follow-up services may vary in format,
intensity, and duration, depending on locally
available resources and patient needs.

Revisited

Patients who survive hospitalization with sepsis or
septic shock often suffer from new or worsening physical, cognitive, and emotional problems which they are
often ill-equipped to navigate (7, 594).
We analyzed eight RCTs (593, 595–601) evaluating the impact of post critical illness follow-up services consisting of variable approaches to the timing of
follow-up care, the type of care delivered, and the outcome measures obtained. The included RCTs provided
peer support programs with multi-component interventions across transitions of care, follow-up clinics,
and primary care management programs. We found
probable small improvements in quality-of-life physical health component (SMD –0.25; 95% CI, –0.40 to
–0.11), symptoms of anxiety (MD –1.41; 95% CI, –2.50
to –0.32) and post-traumatic stress (SMD –0.20, 95%
CI, –0.37 to –0.02), and a potential reduction in hospital readmissions (RR 0.88; 95% CI, 0.73–1.07).
One study provided cost-effectiveness data (596),
however, the heterogeneity of interventions precludes
the ability to evaluate cost-effectiveness of follow-up
services, and this should be explored in future trials. The
panel judged that low resource settings might lack the resources to deliver multi-component care. Additionally,
rural populations might not be able to engage in the
www.ccmjournal.org     61

Prescott et al

delivery of in-person interventions, which could lead to
inequities. Future research should include remote interventions. Nonetheless, the panel also recognized that the
provision of post-hospital care could potentially reduce
health inequities in certain disadvantaged communities
(602). Although available data yielded low certainty in the
efficacy of this intervention, patient experience of these
programs appears positive (603), and they may provide
benefit to patients, families, and clinicians. We suggest
that adult survivors of hospitalization with sepsis or septic
shock be provided with the opportunity to receive sepsisand critical illness follow-up services. We acknowledge
that the format, intensity, and duration of such services
may vary by patient needs and locally available resources.
Despite a clear emphasis from the public panel
members and other patient and family groups internationally on the importance of follow-up care for sepsis
survivors (604), high-quality evidence is lacking. There
is a need to prioritize research in this area. Future work
should consider emerging technologies in the delivery
of post sepsis care as well as understanding patient selection and care delivery intensity.
Physical Rehabilitation
126. For adult survivors of hospitalization for
Revisited
sepsis or septic shock who received
invasive mechanical ventilation >48 hr, we
“suggest” offering physical rehabilitation
services after hospital discharge.
(conditional recommendation; low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Physical rehabilitation services may vary
in format, intensity, and duration, depending
on locally available resources and patient
needs.

New physical and functional disability is common following critical illness with sepsis or septic shock and is
associated with reduced quality of life among survivors
(7, 605–607).
We identified 12 RCTs evaluating physical rehabilitation vs. standard care after hospital discharge that
included 782 patients who had been mechanically ventilated for 48 h or longer (596, 608–618). These studies
included a variety of physical rehabilitation interventions designed to ameliorate physical health sequelae
of critical illness or sepsis. In meta-analysis, the
interventions were associated with possible improvement in various outcomes, including physical function using the six minute walk test (SMD 0.21, 95%
62     www.ccmjournal.org

CI, –0.06 to 0.48, low certainty), quality of life physical
health component (SMD 0.20 higher; 95% CI, –0.10 to
0.51, low certainty), quality of life mental health component (SMD 0.29 higher; 95% CI, –0.02 to 0.59, low
certainty), cognitive function (SMD 0.55 higher; 95%
CI, 0.14–0.97, low certainty), and symptoms of depression (MD –1.10 lower; 95% CI, –2.30 to 0.10). Adverse
events were uncommon.
The panel considered that there was important variability in the included patient populations, the dosage,
type, and duration of the interventions delivered, and
the domain, method, and timing of outcome measures. This variability and the low certainty evidence
precluded a strong recommendation.
Although there were no concerns about acceptability of physical rehabilitation as an intervention for
survivors of sepsis, there were concerns about the
moderate resources and costs required to deliver the
intervention, and the ability to equitably deliver physical rehabilitation services remains unclear. There were
insufficient data to suggest any specific approach to
physical rehabilitation, and the optimal approach will
vary by patient and setting.
Given the prevalence of new or worsening physical
problems experienced by sepsis survivors, and the importance of physical recovery to sepsis survivors and
their families, the panel suggests offering post critical
illness physical rehabilitation for survivors of sepsis or
septic shock, although we acknowledge that such services may vary in format, intensity, and duration depending on patient needs and locally available resources.
Mental Health Services
127. For adult survivors of hospitalization for
Revisited
sepsis or septic shock, we “suggest”
offering services that support mental health
after hospital discharge.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty
evidence)
Remark: Mental health support services may vary
in format, intensity, and duration, depending on
locally available resources and patient needs.
128. Adult survivors of hospitalization for sepsis
or septic shock who demonstrate clinical
symptoms of mental health disorders
should be referred to appropriate
healthcare professionals for evaluation and
management.
(good practice statement)

Revisited

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article

Patients who survive sepsis often suffer a wide range of
mental health symptoms in the months and years following hospital discharge (7, 619). Although some of
these conditions may have predated the hospitalization
for sepsis, there is evidence to suggest that many are
newly acquired, developing presumably due to sepsis
itself or as a consequence of hospital and ICU treatment for sepsis. Post-sepsis mental health diagnoses
are wide-ranging, and include anxiety, depression, and
post-traumatic stress disorder (7, 619). Importantly,
similar findings have been reported in broader ICU
survivor cohorts and following similar conditions,
such as severe COVID-19, acute respiratory failure,
and ARDS (607).
We identified nine RCTs testing variable interventions designed to ameliorate mental health sequelae of
critical illness or sepsis (593, 600, 620–626). In metaanalysis, the interventions increased satisfaction with
care (SMD 0.48; 95% CI, 0.19–0.78, moderate certainty) and possibly decreased depressive symptoms
(RR 0.60; 95% CI, 0.32–1.09, low certainty). The effects
on anxiety and PTSD symptoms were uncertain but
point estimates suggested a possible decrease in anxiety symptoms (RR 0.69; 95% CI, 0.39–1.23, very low
certainty) and increase in PTSD symptoms (RR 1.22;
95% CI, 0.94–1.59, very low certainty).
There was considerable variability in the populations included, the manner and type of interventions
delivered, and the domain, method, and timing of outcomes across included studies. This variability hampered our ability to issue strong recommendations.
Nevertheless, there was broad agreement around some
core principles, and the panel suggests that adult survivors of hospitalization for sepsis or septic shock be
offered services that support mental health after hospital discharge. Such services may vary in format, intensity, and duration, depending on patient needs and
locally available resources. Although this conditional
recommendation applies to any survivor of sepsis or
septic shock, the panel acknowledged that not all survivors may experience mental health symptoms. In
low resource settings, which lack specialized personnel
and have poor availability of mental health services,
this recommendation is particularly challenging. The
panel agreed that all patients who demonstrate signs of
mental health symptoms should be referred for formal
diagnostic evaluation and management by an appropriate healthcare professional.
Critical Care Medicine

Finally, mental health disorders can coincide with
physical and cognitive impairment, and interactions
can occur between these domains of impairment.
Consequently, interventions targeting one domain
may affect another, and the most effective interventions may require multiple components, tailored to a
particular patient’s condition.
Cognition-Targeted Therapy
129. For adult survivors of hospitalization for sepsis
New
or septic shock, there is “insufficient evidence”
to issue a recommendation regarding cognitiontargeted therapies vs. usual care.
Remark: Where cognitive-targeted therapies are
being used, it is reasonable to continue using them
as they are likely acceptable and feasible.

Cognitive impairment is common among patients who
survive sepsis and is a major determinant of caregiving
needs and costs after sepsis (605). It has been estimated
that irreversible cognitive damage after critical illness
and sepsis may be associated with an additional 40
hours per week of informal care provided by caregivers, the equivalent of a full-time job (605). Therefore,
strategies to improve cognitive function after sepsis are
important.
We identified four RCTs (513 total patients) evaluating therapies designed to cognitive function
after critical illness or sepsis (613, 627–629). These
cognition-focused interventions possibly reduced
prevalence of cognitive impairment at follow-up
(RR 0.54; 95% CI, 0.29–1.03, low certainty), possibly
improved global cognitive function using various
measures (SMD 1.04; 95% CI, 0.73–1.35, low certainty), and possibly improved physical function and
mental health-related quality of life. The impact on all
other outcomes was uncertain, but point estimated favored the intervention.
Although the point estimates for all outcomes favored the intervention, the studies were small, and
both the interventions and outcome measures varied
across studies. Although the balance of effects probably favored the intervention, the resources required
were moderate and the certainty of evidence was very
low. The panel judged that the potential personnel,
training, and resource requirements to deliver this intervention warrant higher quality evidence before this
intervention can be recommended. Therefore, we were
www.ccmjournal.org     63

Prescott et al

unable to issue a recommendation regarding the use of
cognition-targeted interventions to improve cognitive
function among survivors of sepsis or septic shock.
Cognitive impairment is common, debilitating, and
associated with lasting implications for patients’ independence and quality of life. Given the absence of
high-quality evidence for interventions to address this
complication of sepsis, there is a need for studies that
identify effective and feasible cognition-targeted therapies to facilitate cognitive recovery among adults who
survive hospitalization for sepsis. Researchers should
prioritize evaluating the efficacy and cost-effectiveness
of cognition-targeted therapies after sepsis and septic
shock.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the important contributions to the
guideline from members of the patient and family subgroup, many of whom have lived experience with sepsis
and have dedicated themselves to improving the care for
those with sepsis worldwide. Members include Dana
Mirman, Jennifer Brod, Jackie Duda (Sepsis Alliance
advisory board member), Mick O’Dowd (Sepsis
Australia Consumer Partner and Advocacy Program),
Orlaith Staunton (founder of END SEPSIS, and in
memory of Rory Staunton), Idelette Numa (coordinator of patient platform Sepsis en daarna/co-founder
of Sepsis Nederland), and others. We would also like
to acknowledge the support of the following Society of
Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) staff members in supporting the guidelines development process, including
Vishakha Kumar, Hariyali Patel, and Dan Woznica.
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Prescott
and Dr. Antonelli, the Co-chairs; Dr. Derde and Dr.
Rochwerg, the Co-vice-chairs; Dr. Alhazzani and
Dr. Hylander Møller, the Methods Co-Leads; Dr. De
Waele, Dr. Gershengorn, Dr. Hodgson, Dr. McIntyre,
Dr. Mer, and Dr. Oczkowski, the Subgroup Heads;
and Dr. Alshamsi, Dr. Belley-Cote, Dr. Dionne, Dr.
Honarmand, Dr. Hylander Møller, and Dr. Nunnally,
the Subgroup Methods Leads, for their invaluable contributions to the development of the Surviving Sepsis
Campaign Adult Guidelines. Special thanks also go to
Dr. Evans and Dr. Kesecioglu, the Conflict of Interest
Co-Chairs, for overseeing and managing potential
conflicts of interest to ensure transparency throughout
the process.
64     www.ccmjournal.org

These guidelines have been endorsed by the following sponsoring societies: African Federation
for
Emergency
Medicine,
African
Sepsis
Alliance, American Association of Critical-Care
Nurses, American College of Chest Physicians
(CHEST), American Thoracic Society, Asia Pacific
Sepsis Alliance, Asian Society of Emergency Medicine,
Association De Medicina Intensiva Brasileira,
Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society,
Canadian Critical Care Society, Chinese Society of
Critical Care Medicine, European Respiratory Society,
European Society for Emergency Medicine, European
Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases, with recognition that successful implementation requires coordinated approaches that align
sepsis protocols with antimicrobial stewardship objectives at the institutional level, German Sepsis Society,
Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine, Infectious
Diseases Society of America, Japanese Society of
Intensive Care Medicine, Latin American Sepsis
Institute, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine,
Society of Hospital Medicine, Surgical Infection
Society, World Federation of Critical Care Nurses,
and World Federation of Intensive and Critical Care
Medicine.
1 Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI.
2 VA Center for Clinical Management Research, VA Ann Arbor
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI.
3 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine,
Fondazione Poiliclinico Universitario A.Gemelli IRCCS,
Rome, Italy.
4 Medical School, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome,
Italy.
5 Health Research Center, Ministry of Defense Health
Services, Riyadh, Saudi Arbia.
6 Department of Critical Care and Internal Medicine, College
of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University,
Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
7 Department of Critical Care, College of Medicine, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
8 Department of Intensive Care, Copenhagen University
Hospital—Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
9 Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
10 Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine and
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
11 Academic Research Organization, Hospital Israelita Albert
Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
12 Divisions of Cardiology and Critical Care, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

36 Escuela de Enfermería, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
del Salvador, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

13 Population Health Research Institute, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada.

37 University of Pittsburgh, Schools of the Health Sciences,
Pittsburgh, PA.

14 World Health Research Trust, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

38 Intensive Care Department, King Abdulaziz Medical City,
Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, King Saud Bin
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King Abdullah
International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

15 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
16 Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium.

39 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Université Paris
Cité, Paris, France.

17 UMC Utrecht, Intensive Care Center, Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.

40 Biomedical Sciences Department, Humanitas University,
Milan, Italy.

18 Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, Utrecht,
Utrecht, the Netherlands.

41 IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Milan, Italy.

19 Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
ON, Canada.

42 Department of Emergency Medicine, Manila Doctors
Hospital, Manila, Philippines.

20 Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and
Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

43 Department of Emergency Medicine, Corazon Locsin
Montelibano Memorial Regional Hospital, Bacolod City,
Philippines.

21 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

44 Department of Emergency Medicine, Southern Philippines
Medical Center, Davao City, Philippines.

22 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine;
Department of Medicine; University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine, Miami, FL.

45 Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

23 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, NY.
24 Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Research
Centre, School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine,
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
25 Intensive Care Unit, Alfred Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
26 Division of Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Mackenzie
Health, Vaughan, ON, Canada.
27 Division of Critical Care, Department of Medicine, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
28 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
29 Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada.
30 Division of Critical Care, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada.
31 Divisions of Critical Care and Pulmonology, Department
of Medicine, Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic
Hospital and Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
32 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Care and Pain
Medicine, New York University, New York, NY.
33 Department of Emergency Medicine, University College
Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.
34 Division of Acute Care Surgical Services, VCU Trauma,
Richmond, VA.
35 Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(CONICET), Instituto de Investigación en Medicina y
Ciencias de la Salud (IIMCS), Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad del Salvador (USAL), Ciudad de Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Critical Care Medicine

46 Medical ICU, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Beijing, China.
47 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Kyoto
University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
48 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
49 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL.
50 Intensive Care Department, SODIR Research Group.
Hospital Vall d’Hebron. Barcelona, Spain.
51 Department of Medicine, Universitat Autonoma Barcelona,
Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.
52 Department of Critical Care Medicine, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
53 Department of Critical Care, Hamilton Health Sciences,
Hamilton, ON Canada.
54 Department of Critical Care, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia.
55 Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
56 Department of Emergency, Hôpital Pitié-Salpetriere,
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, France.
57 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Division of Pulmonary
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical
Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
58 Section of Hospital Medicine, Division of General Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, MA.
59 Critical Care Program, The George Institute for Global
Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
60 Malcolm Fisher Department of Intensive Care, Royal North
Shore Hospital, Northern Sydney Local Health District, St
Leonards, NSW, Australia.

www.ccmjournal.org     65

Prescott et al
61 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Ziauddin University,
Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan.
62 Department of Intensive Care medicine, Radboud University
Medical Center Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

88 King’s College London, London, United Kingdom.
89 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, The Queen
Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

63 Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD.

90 Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

64 Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD.

91 School of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Monash
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

65 Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Department of
Clinical Sciences, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

92 Institute of Infectious Diseases and Infection Control, Jena
University Hospital/Friedrich Schiller University, Jena,
Germany.

66 Walimu, Kampala, Uganda.
67 Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical
School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston,
MA.

93 Center for Sepsis Care and Control, Jena University
Hospital/Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany.

68 Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, MA.

94 University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research,
Faculty of Health Medicine and Behavioural Sciences,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

69 Department of Anaesthesia, Makerere University College of
health sciences, Kampala, Uganda.

95 Herston Infectious Diseases Institute (HeIDI), Metro North
Health, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

70 Section of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.

96 Division of Anesthesia Critical Care and Emergency and
Pain Medicine, University of Montpellier, Nimes University
Hospital, Nimes, France.

71 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
72 Hoag Hospital Memorial Presbyterian, Newport Beach, CA.
73 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine,
Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI.
74 Intensive Care Department, Hospital São Paulo, Escola
Paulista de Medicina Universidade Federal de São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.
75 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Hospital Anchieta
ICU Complex, Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.
76 University of Brasília (UnB), Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.
77 Escola Superior de Ciências da Saúde (ESCS), Brasília,
Federal District, Brazil.
78 Bethesda, MD.
79 Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC.
80 Section of Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Anesthesiology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC.
81 School of Public Health, Monash University Victoria,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
82 Healthcare Improvement Studies Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
83 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Iowa
Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA.
84 Department of Anesthesia Critical Care, University of Iowa
Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA.
85 Department of Epidemiology, University of Iowa College of
Public Health, Iowa City, IA.
86 Department of Anaesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain, Tata
Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.
87 Department of Intensive Care, Guy’s & St Thomas’ Hospital,
London, United Kingdom.
66     www.ccmjournal.org

97 Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Moinhos de
Vento, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
98 Postgraduate Program in Pneumological Sciences,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre,
Brazil.
99 Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
100 Department of Surgery Kalamazoo, Western Michigan
University Homer Stryker MD, School of Medicine, MI.
101 Cooper Research Institute (Critical Care), Camden, NJ.
102 Cooper Medical School, Rowan University, Camden, NJ.
103 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine,
University of Kansas, Kansas City, Kansas City, KS.
104 Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China.
105 Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
106 Center for Infection and Molecular Medicine (CIMM),
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
107 ESCMID Study Group for Bloodstream Infections,
Endocarditis, and Sepsis (ESGBIES), European Society of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID),
Basel, Switzerland.
108 Adult Critical Care, St George’s University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
109 Department of Surgery and Emory Critical Care Center,
Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct
URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the
HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal’s website
(http://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal).
Drs. Prescott and Antonelli are co-first authors.
Drs. Rhodes and Coopersmith are co-senior authors.
Dr. Fox-Robichaud reported serving as the scientific director
of Sepsis Canada and as principal investigator (PI) on a study
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Dr. Rhodes
reported serving as an advisor for Maquet. Dr. Kwizera reported
receiving research support from Fisher and Paykel and Vygon
and serving as primary author on a trial funded by Wellcome
Trust. Dr. Du reported serving as president of the Chinese
Association of Critical Care Physicians and the Chinese College
of Critical Care Medicine. Dr. Rochwerg reported membership
on the American Thoracic Society (ATS) guideline committee for
noninvasive respiratory support and the corticosteroids in sepsis
guideline committee. Dr. Hodgson reported an executive role
at Monash Partners, research support from the National Health
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), and membership on
the European Respiratory Society/ATS ICU rehabilitation guideline committee. Dr. Angus reported serving as a senior editor for
JAMA. Dr. Azoulay reported receiving lecture fees from Baxter,
Gilead, Alexion, and Pfizer. Dr. Machado reported serving as PI
on the NOVA trial funded by Biolab, receiving speaking fees from
BioMérieux, and serving as an advisor for Baxter. Dr. Prescott reported serving as a consultant for Aurobac Therapeutics. Dr. De
Waele reported serving as a consultant for Roche Diagnostics. Dr.
Roberts reported serving as a consultant for BioMérieux and as
primary author on a study funded by the NHMRC. Dr. McPeake
reported serving as a consultant for AstraZeneca, with payments
made to her institution. Dr. Wiersinga reported receiving research
support from Moderna and serving as PI on a study funded by
Amsterdam UMC. Dr. Kesecioglu reported receiving lecture
honoraria from Dräger Medical Equipment. Dr. Doi reported receiving research support from Nipro and is a Council member of
the Japanese Society of Intensive Care. Dr. Honarmand reported
receiving research support from the Lawson Health Research
Institute and serving on the ATS guideline committee for early
mobilization. Dr. Evans reported serving as vice-chair of rapid
response for CHEST and chair of the ABIM council. Dr. Alberto
reported membership in the World Federation of Critical Care
Nurses and serving as a reviewer for a systematic review funded
by Universidad del Salvador. Dr. Heunks reported serving as a
consultant for Liberate Medical and receiving research support
from the ATS. Dr. Derde reported involvement in the IMPRINT
and ECRAID-Base trials; receiving financial and drug contributions for the REMAP-CAP trial from Roche, Sanofi, SOBI, Faron,
and Dimerix (all paid to her institution). Dr. Azevedo reported receiving speaking fees from Baxter, MSD, and Nestle. Dr. Hashmi
reported membership in Asia Pacific Sepsis Alliance and ISARIC.
Dr. Nunnally reported serving as co-chair of the Surviving Sepsis
Campaign Research Committee and participating in activities
for ASA, AHA, and SOCCA. Dr. Ostermann reported research
support from Baxter and BioMérieux (paid to her institution) and
coauthoring articles on hemoadsorption. Dr. Antonelli reported
serving as an advisor for AstraZeneca, Grifols, Menarini, and
Shionogi, and as a consultant for Baxter. Dr. Klompas reported
receiving royalties from UpToDate and research support from the
AHRQ and CDC. Dr. Gong reported serving as a section editor
for Wolters Kluwer. Dr. Ego reported serving as vice-chair of the
Japanese Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Dr. Moller reported
sponsorship of the EMPRESS RCT. Dr. Leeies reported membership in the Canadian Critical Care Society and the Canadian
Society for Transplantation. Dr. Hammond reported receiving research support and IV fluids from Baxter Healthcare. Dr. Mohr
reported serving as primary author on a study funded by AHRQ
and HRSA and serving on the board of Society for Academic
Emergency Medicine. Dr. Ferrer reported receiving speaking fees
Critical Care Medicine

from Pfizer and owning stock in Grifols. Dr. Rosa reported receiving grants from the Brazilian Ministry of Health paid to his
company. Dr. Sawyer reported receiving consultancy fees from
Molnlycke, Shionogi, and AbbVie and research support from the
NIH. Dr. Maves reported research support from AiCuris, Biotest,
Geovax, and Merck (paid to his institution) and serving as a consultant for Shionogi. Dr. Peake reported serving as co-PI on the
ARISE FLUIDS trial. Dr. Jacob reported serving as PI and CSO
for the STAIRS study. Dr. Oczkowski reported serving as a consultant for VitalAire. Dr. McGloughlin reported serving as a consultant for the WHO and as clinical director for the Australian
Living Evidence Collaboration. Dr. Simpson reported serving
on the editorial board of CHEST SEEK. Dr. Iwashyna reported
coauthoring the Haines article. Dr. Arabi reported serving as PI
on the SCREEN trial and chair of the Saudi Critical Care Society
trials group. Dr. Freund reported serving as PI on the 1BED trial.
Drs. Prescott and Antonelli served as guidelines co-chairs.
Drs. Alhazzani and Møller served as methods co-leads. Drs.
Alshamsi, Azevedo, Belley-Cote, De Waele, Derde, Dionne,
Evans, Gershengorn, Hodgson, Honarmand, Kesecioglu,
McIntyre, Mer, Nunnally, Oczkowski, Rochwerg served in
guidelines leadership roles. Akinola, Akuamoah-Boateng,
Alberto, Angus, Arabi, Azoulay, Cecconi, Convocar, De
Pascale, Doi, Du, Egi, Elie-Turenne, Ferrer, Fox-Robichaud,
French, Freund, Gong, Hale, Hammond, Hashmi, Heunks,
Iwashyna, Jacob, Klompas, Kwizera, Leeies, Lejnieks, Levy,
Machado, Maia, Masur, Maves, McGloughlin, McPeake, Mohr,
Myatra, Ostermann, Peake, Pletz, Roberts, Rosa, Sawyer,
Schorr, Simpson, Weng, and Wiersinga, served as guidelines
panelists. Drs. Rhodes and Coopersmith served as Surviving
Sepsis Campaign Leaders.
For information regarding this article, E-mail:

REFERENCES
1. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al: The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock
(Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315:801–810
2. Reinhart K, Daniels R, Kissoon N, et al: Recognizing sepsis
as a global health priority - A WHO resolution. N Engl J Med
2017; 377:414–417
3. Meyer NJ, Prescott HC: Sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J
Med 2024; 391:2133–2146
4. Rudd KE, Johnson SC, Agesa KM, et al: Global, regional,
and national sepsis incidence and mortality, 1990-2017:
Analysis for the global burden of disease study. Lancet 2020;
395:200–211
5. Global Sepsis Alliance. 2030 Global Agenda for
Sepsis; Making the Next Success Story in Global
Health. Available at: https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/58a7025b8419c215b30b2df3/t/67d1879b8dbfb0
6f8c3be697/1741784989573/2030_Global_Agenda_for_
Sepsis_Online.pdf. Accessed September 27, 2025
6. Collaborators, G.B.D.G.S.: Global, regional, and national sepsis
incidence and mortality, 1990-2021: A systematic analysis.
Lancet Glob Health 2025; 13:e2013–e2026
7. Prescott HC, Angus DC: Enhancing recovery from sepsis: A
review. JAMA 2018; 319:62–75
www.ccmjournal.org     67

Prescott et al
8. Fleischmann-Struzek C, Born S, Kesselmeier M, et al:
Functional dependence following intensive care unit-treated
sepsis: three-year follow-up results from the prospective MidGerman Sepsis Cohort (MSC). Lancet Reg Health Eur 2024;
46:101066
9. Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, Moberg J, et al; GRADE
Working Group: GRADE evidence to decision (EtD) frameworks: A systematic and transparent approach to making
well informed healthcare choices. 1: Introduction. BMJ 2016;
353:i2016
10. Santesso N, Glenton C, Dahm P, et al; GRADE Working Group:
GRADE guidelines 26: Informative statements to communicate the findings of systematic reviews of interventions. J Clin
Epidemiol 2020; 119:126–135
11. Guyatt GH, Schünemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, et al: Guideline
panels should not GRADE good practice statements. J Clin
Epidemiol 2015; 68:597–600
12. Guyatt GH, Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, et al: Guideline
panels should seldom make good practice statements:
Guidance from the GRADE Working Grou. J Clin Epidemiol
2016; 80:3–7
13. Freund Y, Cancella de Abreu M, Lebal S, et al: Effect of the 1-h
bundle on mortality in patients with suspected sepsis in the
emergency department: A stepped wedge cluster randomized
clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50:1086–1095
14. Arabi YM, Alsaawi A, Alzahrani M, et al; SCREEN Trial
Group and the Saudi Critical Care Trials Group: Electronic
sepsis screening among patients admitted to hospital wards:
A stepped-wedge cluster randomized trial. JAMA 2025;
333:763–773
15. Damiani E, Donati A, Serafini G, et al: Effect of performance
improvement programs on compliance with sepsis bundles
and mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. PLoS One 2015; 10:e0125827
16. Levy MM, Gesten FC, Phillips GS, et al: Mortality changes associated with mandated public reporting for sepsis. The results
of the New York state initiative. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2018; 198:1406–1412
17. Kahn JM, Davis BS, Yabes JG, et al: Association between
state-mandated protocolized sepsis care and in-hospital mortality among adults with sepsis. JAMA 2019; 322:240–250
18. Levy MM, Dellinger RP, Townsend SR, et al: The Surviving
Sepsis Campaign: Results of an international guideline-based
performance improvement program targeting severe sepsis.
Intensive Care Med 2010; 36:222–231
19. Tarabichi Y, Cheng A, Bar-Shain D, et al: Improving timeliness
of antibiotic administration using a provider and pharmacist
facing sepsis early warning system in the emergency department setting: A randomized controlled quality improvement initiative. Crit Care Med 2022; 50:418–427
20. CDC: Hospital Sepsis Program Core Elements. 2023.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/media/pdfs/sepsiscore-elements-H.pdf Accessed August 14, 2025
21. Prescott HC, Posa PJ, Dantes R: The centers for disease control and prevention’s hospital sepsis program core elements.
JAMA 2023; 330:1617–1618
22. Scheer CS, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Ferrer R, et al; European
Sepsis Care Study Group: Status of sepsis care in european

68     www.ccmjournal.org

hospitals: Results from an international cross-sectional survey.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2025; 211:587–599
23. Dantes RB, Kaur H, Bouwkamp BA, et al: Sepsis program
activities in acute care hospitals - national healthcare safety
network, United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2023; 72:907–911
24. Schwarzkopf D, Rüddel H, Brinkmann A, et al: The german
quality network sepsis: evaluation of a quality collaborative on
decreasing sepsis-related mortality in a controlled interrupted
time series analysis. Front Med (Lausanne) 2022; 9:882340
25. Schoffelen T, Papan C, Carrara E, et al; ESCMID Study Group
for Antimicrobial Stewardship (ESGAP): European society
of clinical microbiology and infectious diseases guidelines
for antimicrobial stewardship in emergency departments
(endorsed by European association of hospital pharmacists).
Clin Microbiol Infect 2024; 30:1384–1407
26. Guirgis FW, Jones L, Esma R, et al: Managing sepsis: Electronic
recognition, rapid response teams, and standardized care save
lives. J Crit Care 2017; 40:296–302
27. Garcia-Lopez L, Grau-Cerrato S, de Frutos-Soto A, et al;
Grupo de Trabajo Multidisciplinar en Código Sepsis del
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid: Impact of the implementation of a Sepsis Code hospital protocol in antibiotic
prescription and clinical outcomes in an intensive care unit.
Med Intensiva 2017; 41:12–20
28. Arabi YM, Al-Dorzi HM, Alamry A, et al: The impact of a multifaceted intervention including sepsis electronic alert system
and sepsis response team on the outcomes of patients with
sepsis and septic shock. Ann Intensive Care 2017; 7:57
29. Peltan ID, Bledsoe JR, Jacobs JR, et al: Effectiveness
and safety of an emergency department code sepsis protocol: A pragmatic clinical trial. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2024;
21:1560–1571
30. Jones SL, Ashton CM, Kiehne L, et al: Reductions in sepsis
mortality and costs after design and implementation of a
nurse-based early recognition and response program. Jt
Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2015; 41:483–491
31. Song J, et al: The effect of the intelligent sepsis management
system on outcomes among patients with sepsis and septic
shock diagnosed according to the sepsis-3 definition in the
emergency department. J Clin Med 2019; 8
32. Shah T, Sterk E, Rech MA: Emergency department sepsis
screening tool decreases time to antibiotics in patients with
sepsis. Am J Emerg Med 2018; 36:1745–1748
33. Champunot R, Kamsawang N, Thimsri D, et al: Effects on outcome of patients with severe sepsis and septic shock admitted
to the ICU after implementation cooperative sepsis management protocol. Crit Care 2012; 16(Suppl 3):104
34. Elias R, MacPherson-Dias R, Kurtz A, et al: ICU sepsis response
team and septic shock mortality: A pre-post intervention study.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199:A7175–A7175
35. Schinkel M, Holleman F, Vleghels R, et al: The impact of a
sepsis performance improvement program in the emergency
department: A before-after intervention study. Infection 2023;
51:945–954
36. Rosenqvist M, Fagerstrand E, Lanbeck P, et al: Sepsis alert a triage model that reduces time to antibiotics and length of
hospital stay. Infect Dis (Lond) 2017; 49:507–513

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
37. McDonald CM, West S, Dushenski D, et al: Sepsis now a priority: A quality improvement initiative for early sepsis recognition and care. Int J Qual Health Care 2018; 30:802–809
38. Threatt DL: Improving sepsis bundle implementation times:
A nursing process improvement approach. J Nurs Care Qual
2020; 35:135–139
39. Rosenqvist M, Bengtsson-Toni M, Tham J, et al: Improved outcomes after regional implementation of sepsis alert: A novel
triage model. Crit Care Med 2020; 48:484–490
40. Roman CP, Dooley M, Nevill A, et al: Introduction of an emergency medicine pharmacist-led sepsis alert response system
in the emergency department: A cohort study. Emerg Med
Australas 2023; 35:564–571
41. Patocka C, Turner J, Xue X, et al: Evaluation of an emergency
department triage screening tool for suspected severe sepsis
and septic shock. J Healthc Qual 2014; 36:52–61; quiz 59
42. Hayden GE, Tuuri RE, Scott R, et al: Triage sepsis alert and
sepsis protocol lower times to fluids and antibiotics in the ED.
Am J Emerg Med 2016; 34:1–9
43. Borrelli G, Koch E, Sterk E, et al: Early recognition of sepsis
through emergency medical services pre-hospital screening.
Am J Emerg Med 2019; 37:1428–1432
44. Troncoso R Jr, Garfinkel EM, Hinson JS, et al: Do prehospital
sepsis alerts decrease time to complete CMS sepsis measures? Am J Emerg Med 2023; 71:81–85
45. Idrees M, Macdonald S, Kodali K: Sepsis early alert tool: Early
recognition and timely management in the emergency department. Emerg Med Australas 2016; 28:399–403
46. Moore WR, Vermuelen A, Taylor R, et al: Improving 3-hour
sepsis bundled care outcomes: Implementation of a nursedriven sepsis protocol in the emergency department. J Emerg
Nurs 2019; 45:690–698
47. Currie KE, Barry H, Scanlan JM, et al: Impact of a multidisciplinary sepsis huddle in the emergency department. Am J Emerg
Med 2023; 64:150–154
48. Petit J, Passerieux J, Maître O, et al; qSOFAST study group:
Impact of a qSOFA-based triage procedure on antibiotic timing in ED patients with sepsis: A prospective interventional
study. Am J Emerg Med 2020; 38:477–484
49. Austrian JS, Jamin CT, Doty GR, et al: Impact of an emergency
department electronic sepsis surveillance system on patient
mortality and length of stay. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2018;
25:523–529
50. Williams G, Alberto L, Taha M, et al: The challenges of compliance with sepsis management protocols in low and low-middle
income countries - A cross-sectional study. Intensive Crit Care
Nurs 2025; 90:104032
51. Pedersen PB, Henriksen DP, Mikkelsen S, et al: Dispatch
and prehospital transport for acute septic patients: An observational study. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med 2017;
25:51
52. Groenewoudt M, Roest AA, Leijten FMM, et al: Septic patients
arriving with emergency medical services: A seriously ill population. Eur J Emerg Med 2014; 21:330–335
53. Loza-Gomez A, Hofmann E, NokLam C, et al: Severe sepsis
and septic shock in patients transported by prehospital services versus walk in patients to the emergency department. Am
J Emerg Med 2021; 45:173–178
Critical Care Medicine

54. Lin CB, Peterson ED, Smith EE, et al: Emergency medical service hospital prenotification is associated with improved evaluation and treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Circ Cardiovasc
Qual Outcomes 2012; 5:514–522
55. Bradley EH, Herrin J, Wang Y, et al: Strategies for reducing the
door-to-balloon time in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J
Med 2006; 355:2308–2320
56. Smyth MA, Brace-McDonnell SJ, Perkins GD: Identification of
adults with sepsis in the prehospital environment: A systematic
review. BMJ Open 2016; 6:e011218
57. Oanesa RD, Su TW, Weissman A: Evidence for use of validated
sepsis screening tools in the prehospital population: A scoping
review. Prehosp Emerg Care 2024; 28:485–493
58. Lane D, Ichelson RI, Drennan IR, et al: Prehospital management and identification of sepsis by emergency medical services: A systematic review. Emerg Med J 2016; 33:408–413
59. Piedmont S, Goldhahn L, Swart E, et al: Sepsis incidence, suspicion, prediction and mortality in emergency medical services: A cohort study related to the current international sepsis
guideline. Infection 2024; 52:1325–1335
60. Kumar A, Abbenbroek B, Delaney A, et al: Sepsis triggers and
tools to support early identification in healthcare settings: An
integrative review. Aust Crit Care 2023; 36:1117–1128
61. Hunter CL, Silvestri S, Stone A, et al: Prehospital sepsis alert
notification decreases time to initiation of CMS sepsis core
measures. Am J Emerg Med 2019; 37:114–117
62. Guerra WF, Mayfield TR, Meyers MS, et al: Early detection and
treatment of patients with severe sepsis by prehospital personnel. J Emerg Med 2013; 44:1116–1125
63. Mixon M, Dietrich S, Floren M, et al: Time to antibiotic administration: Sepsis alerts called in emergency department versus
in the field via emergency medical services. Am J Emerg Med
2021; 44:291–295
64. Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna TJ, et al: Assessment of clinical
criteria for sepsis: For the third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016;
315:762–774
65. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis
Campaign: International guidelines for management of
sepsis and septic shock 2021. Intensive Care Med 2021;
47:1181–1247
66. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis
Campaign: International guidelines for management of sepsis
and septic shock 2021. Crit Care Med 2021; 49:e1063–e1143
67. Fernando SM, Tran A, Taljaard M, et al: Prognostic accuracy
of the quick sequential organ failure assessment for mortality
in patients with suspected infection: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2018; 168:266–275
68. Herwanto V, Shetty A, Nalos M, et al: Accuracy of quick sequential organ failure assessment score to predict sepsis
mortality in 121 studies including 1,716,017 individuals: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Explor 2019;
1:e0043
69. Serafim R, Gomes JA, Salluh J, et al: A comparison of the
quick-SOFA and systemic inflammatory response syndrome
criteria for the diagnosis of sepsis and prediction of mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2018;
153:646–655
www.ccmjournal.org     69

Prescott et al
70. Adegbite BR, Edoa JR, Ndzebe Ndoumba WF, et al: A comparison
of different scores for diagnosis and mortality prediction of adults
with sepsis in Low-and-Middle-Income Countries: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine 2021; 42:101184
71. Chua WL, Rusli KDB, Aitken LM: Early warning scores for
sepsis identification and prediction of in-hospital mortality in
adults with sepsis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Clin Nurs 2024; 33:2005–2018
72. Elperin J, Van Perre K, Bryant NH: 1193: Sepsis: Is it time to
leave sirs behind? A systematic review and meta-analysis of
sepsis definitions. Crit Care Med 2023; 51:59
73. Qiu X, Lei Y, Zhou RX: SIRS, SOFA, qSOFA, and NEWS in
the diagnosis of sepsis and prediction of adverse outcomes:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Expert Rev Anti Infect
Ther 2023; 21:891–900
74. Machado FR, Cavalcanti AB, Monteiro MB, et al; Instituto
Latino-Americano de Sepsis network investigators: Predictive
accuracy of the quick sepsis-related organ failure assessment
score in brazil. A prospective multicenter study. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2020; 201:789–798
75. Islam MM, Nasrin T, Walther BA, et al: Prediction of sepsis
patients using machine learning approach: A meta-analysis.
Comput Methods Programs Biomed 2019; 170:1–9
76. Haas R, McGill SR: Artificial Intelligence for the prediction of
sepsis in adults. Can J Health Tech 2022; 2
77. Crouser ED, Parrillo JE, Seymour CW, et al: Monocyte distribution width: A novel indicator of sepsis-2 and sepsis-3 in highrisk emergency department patients. Crit Care Med 2019;
47:1018–1025
78. Crouser ED, Parrillo JE, Seymour C, et al: Improved early detection of sepsis in the ED with a novel monocyte distribution
width biomarker. Chest 2017; 152:518–526
79. O’Neal HR Jr, Sheybani R, Kraus CK, et al: Cellular host response sepsis test for risk stratification of patients in the
emergency department: A pooled analysis. Acad Emerg Med
2024; 31:883–893
80. O’Neal HR Jr, Sheybani R, Caffery TS, et al: Assessment of a
cellular host response test to risk-stratify suspected COVID19 patients in the emergency department setting. PLoS One
2022; 17:e0264220
81. Balk R, Esper AM, Martin GS, et al: Validation of SeptiCyte
RAPID to discriminate sepsis from non-infectious systemic inflammation. J Clin Med 2024; 13:1194
82. Liesenfeld O, Arora S, Aufderheide TP, et al: Clinical validation
of an AI-based blood testing device for diagnosis and prognosis
of acute infection and sepsis. Nat Med 2025; 31:4044–4054
83. Bhargava A, López-Espina C, Schmalz L, et al: FDA-authorized
AI/ML tool for sepsis prediction: Development and validation.
NEJM AI 2024; 1
84. Mai B, Zhou L, Wang Q, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of pancreatic stone protein in patients with sepsis: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis 2024; 24:472
85. Martin-Loeches I, Singer M, Leone M: Sepsis: Key insights,
future directions, and immediate goals. A review and expert
opinion. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50:2043–2049
86. Stephen AH, Montoya RL, Aluisio AR: Sepsis and septic shock
in low- and middle-income countries. Surg Infect (Larchmt)
2020; 21:571–578
70     www.ccmjournal.org

87. Prescott HC: The epidemiology of sepsis. In: Wersinga WJ,
Seymour CW, eds. Handbook of sepsis. Cham, Switzerland,
Springer International Publishing, 2018: 15–28
88. Lamy B, Dargère S, Arendrup MC, et al: How to optimize
the use of blood cultures for the diagnosis of bloodstream infections? A state-of-the art. Front Microbiol
2016; 7:697
89. Vashti A, Mullan PJ, Nitzberg M: Single-site sampling strategy
versus multi-site sampling strategy in blood culture collection within the hospital setting: A systematic review. Am J
Infect Control 2025; 53:1113–1120
90. Ntusi N, Aubin L, Oliver S, et al: Guideline for the optimal use
of blood cultures. S Afr Med J 2010; 100:839–843
91. Fabre V, Sharara SL, Salinas AB, et al: Does this patient need
blood cultures? A scoping review of indications for blood
cultures in adult nonneutropenic inpatients. Clin Infect Dis
2020; 71:1339–1347
92. Papavarnavas NS, et al.: Practice update to optimise the performance and interpretation of blood cultures: 2022. S Afr
Med J 2022; 112:397–402
93. S3-Leitlinie: Sepsis – Prävention, Diagnose, Therapie
und Nachsorge – Update 2025. Available at: https://register.awmf.org/assets/guidelines/079-001l_S3_SepsisPraevention-Diagnose-Therapie-Nachsorge_2025-07.pdf
Accessed August 12, 2025
94. Miller JM, Binnicker MJ, Campbell S, et al: A guide to utilization of the microbiology laboratory for diagnosis of infectious
diseases: 2018 update by the infectious diseases society
of America and the American society for microbiology. Clin
Infect Dis 2018; 67:813–816
95. Towns ML, Jarvis WR, Hsueh PR: Guidelines on blood cultures. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2010; 43:347–349
96. Weinstein MP, Reller LB, Murphy JR, et al: The clinical significance of positive blood cultures: A comprehensive analysis of 500 episodes of bacteremia and fungemia in adults.
I. Laboratory and epidemiologic observations. Rev Infect Dis
1983; 5:35–53
97. Grohs P, Mainardi J-L, Podglajen I, et al: Relevance of routine use of the anaerobic blood culture bottle. J Clin Microbiol
2007; 45:2711–2715
98. Lafaurie M, d'Anglejan E, Donay JL, et al: Utility of anaerobic
bottles for the diagnosis of bloodstream infections. BMC
Infect Dis 2020; 20:142
99. Chandler MT, Morton ES, Byrd RP, et al: Reevaluation of anaerobic blood cultures in a Veteran population. South Med J
2000; 93:986–988
100. Yarahmadi S, Ebrahimzadeh F, Mohamadipour F, et al: Effect
of prone position on clinical outcomes of nonintubated
patients with COVID-19: A randomised clinical trial. Collegian
2023; 30:449–456
101. Cheng MP, Stenstrom R, Paquette K, et al; FABLED
Investigators: Blood culture results before and after antimicrobial administration in patients with severe manifestations of sepsis: A diagnostic study. Ann Intern Med 2019;
171:547–554
102. Liu C, Bayer A, Cosgrove SE, et al: Clinical practice guidelines by the infectious diseases society of America for the
treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
infections in adults and children: Executive summary. Clin
Infect Dis 2011; 52:285–292
103. Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes DR, et al: Clinical practice
guideline for the management of candidiasis: 2016 update
by the infectious diseases society of America. Clin Infect Dis
2016; 62:e1–50
104. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis
Campaign: International guidelines for management of
sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med 2017;
43:304–377
105. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis
Campaign: international guidelines for management
of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Crit Care Med 2017;
45:486–552
106. Liu V, Morehouse JW, Soule J, et al: Fluid volume, lactate
values, and mortality in sepsis patients with intermediate lactate values. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2013; 10:466–473
107. Shankar-Hari M, Phillips GS, Levy ML, et al; Sepsis
Definitions Task Force: Developing a new definition and
assessing new clinical criteria for septic shock: For the third
international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic
shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315:775–787
108. Liu VX, Morehouse JW, Marelich GP, et al: Multicenter implementation of a treatment bundle for patients with sepsis and
intermediate lactate values. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016;
193:1264–1270
109. Kuttab HI, Lykins JD, Hughes MD, et al: Evaluation
and predictors of fluid resuscitation in patients with
severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 2019;
47:1582–1590
110. Corl KA, Levy MM, Holder AL, et al: Moderate IV fluid resuscitation is associated with decreased sepsis mortality. Crit
Care Med 2024; 52:e557–e567
111. Peake SL, Delaney A, Bellomo R; ARISE Investigators: Goaldirected resuscitation in septic shock. N Engl J Med 2015;
372:190–191
112. Pro CI, et al.: A randomized trial of protocol-based care for
early septic shock. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:1683–1693
113. Mouncey PR, Osborn TM, Power GS, et al; ProMISe Trial
Investigators: Trial of early, goal-directed resuscitation for
septic shock. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:1301–1311
114. Investigators P, et al.: Early, goal-directed therapy for septic
shock - A patient-level meta-analysis. N Engl J Med 2017;
376:2223–2234
115. Ward MA, Kuttab HI, Badgett RG: The effect of early fluid
resuscitation on mortality in sepsis: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2025; 53:e1790–e1802
116. Taylor SP, Karvetski CH, Templin MA, et al: Initial fluid resuscitation following adjusted body weight dosing is associated
with improved mortality in obese patients with suspected
septic shock. J Crit Care 2018; 43:7–12
117. Lemmens HJ, Bernstein D, Brodsky JB: Estimating blood
volume in obese and morbidly obese patients. Obes Surg
2006; 16:773–776
118. Anderson MR, Shashaty MGS: Impact of obesity in critical
illness. Chest 2021; 160:2135–2145
119. Gendreau S, Frapard T, Carteaux G, et al: Geo-economic
influence on the effect of fluid volume for sepsis
Critical Care Medicine

resuscitation: A meta-analysis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2024; 209:517–528
120. Morton B, Stolbrink M, Kagima W, et al: The early recognition
and management of sepsis in sub-saharan African adults: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public
Health 2018; 15:2017
121. Andrews B, Semler MW, Muchemwa L, et al: Effect of an
early resuscitation protocol on in-hospital mortality among
adults with sepsis and hypotension: A randomized clinical
trial. JAMA 2017; 318:1233–1240
122. Andrews B, Muchemwa L, Kelly P, et al: Simplified severe
sepsis protocol: a randomized controlled trial of modified
early goal-directed therapy in Zambia. Crit Care Med 2014;
42:2315–2324
122a. Devine BJ: Gentamicin therapy. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1974;
8:650
123. Mekontso Dessap A, AlShamsi F, Belletti A, et al; European
Society of Intensive Care Medicine: European Society of
Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) 2025 clinical practice
guideline on fluid therapy in adult critically ill patients: Part
2-the volume of resuscitation fluids. Intensive Care Med
2025; 51:461–477
124. Ahn C, Yu G, Shin TG, et al: Comparison of early and late
norepinephrine administration in patients with septic shock:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2024;
166:1417–1430
125. Permpikul C, Tongyoo S, Viarasilpa T, et al: Early use of norepinephrine in septic shock resuscitation (CENSER). A randomized trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199:1097–1105
126. Varpula M, Tallgren M, Saukkonen K, et al: Hemodynamic
variables related to outcome in septic shock. Intensive Care
Med 2005; 31:1066–1071
127. Shi R, Braïk R, Monnet X, et al: Early norepinephrine for
patients with septic shock: An updated systematic review
and meta-analysis with trial sequential analysis. Crit Care
2025; 29:182
128. Li Y, Li H, Zhang D: Timing of norepinephrine initiation in
patients with septic shock: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Crit Care 2020; 24:488
129. Zhou HX, Yang C-F, Wang H-Y, et al: Should we initiate vasopressors earlier in patients with septic shock: A mini systemic review. World J Crit Care Med 2023; 12:204–216
130. Elbouhy MA, Soliman M, Gaber A, et al: Early use of norepinephrine improves survival in septic shock: Earlier than early.
Arch Med Res 2019; 50:325–332
131. Bai X, Yu W, Ji W, et al: Early versus delayed administration of
norepinephrine in patients with septic shock. Crit Care 2014;
18:532
132. Colon Hidalgo D, Patel J, Masic D, et al: Delayed vasopressor
initiation is associated with increased mortality in patients
with septic shock. J Crit Care 2020; 55:145–148
133. National Heart L, et al.: Early restrictive or liberal fluid management for sepsis-induced hypotension. N Engl J Med
2023; 388:499–510
134. Owen VS, Rosgen BK, Cherak SJ, et al: Adverse events
associated with administration of vasopressor medications
through a peripheral intravenous catheter: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2021; 25:146
www.ccmjournal.org     71

Prescott et al
135. Tian DH, Smyth C, Keijzers G, et al: Safety of peripheral administration of vasopressor medications: A systematic review. Emerg Med Australas 2020; 32:220–227
136. Greenwald HP, Gootnick A, Luger NM, et al: Tissue necrosis
following subcutaneous infiltration with nor-epinephrine; report of two cases. N Engl J Med 1952; 246:252–253
137. Munroe ES, Weinstein J, Gershengorn HB, et al:
Understanding how clinicians personalize fluid and vasopressor decisions in early sepsis management. JAMA Netw
Open 2024; 7:e247480
138. Munroe E, Claar D, Tamae-Kakazu M, et al: Hospital policies
on intravenous vasopressor administration and monitoring:
A survey of michigan hospitals. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2022;
19:1769–1772
139. Ricard JD, Salomon L, Boyer A, et al: Central or peripheral catheters for initial venous access of ICU patients:
A randomized controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2013;
41:2108–2115
140. Stolz A, Efendy R, Apte Y, et al: Safety and efficacy of peripheral versus centrally administered vasopressor infusion:
A single-centre retrospective observational study. Aust Crit
Care 2022; 35:506–511
141. Delaney A, Finnis M, Bellomo R, et al: Initiation of vasopressor
infusions via peripheral versus central access in patients with
early septic shock: A retrospective cohort study. Emerg Med
Australas 2020; 32:210–219
142. Munroe ES, Heath ME, Eteer M, et al: Use and outcomes
of peripheral vasopressors in early sepsis-induced hypotension across michigan hospitals: A retrospective cohort study.
Chest 2024; 165:847–857
143. Munroe ES, Co IN, Douglas I, et al; NHLBI PETAL Network:
Peripheral vasopressor use in early sepsis-induced hypotension. JAMA Netw Open 2025; 8:e2529148
144. Asher E, Karameh H, Nassar H, et al; Jerusalem Platelets
Thrombosis and Intervention in Cardiology (JUPITER-16)
Study Group: Safety and outcomes of peripherally administered vasopressor infusion in patients admitted with shock
to an intensive cardiac care unit-A single-center prospective
study. J Clin Med 2023; 12:5734
145. Groetzinger LM, Williams J, Svec S, et al: Peripherally infused
norepinephrine to avoid central venous catheter placement in
a medical intensive care unit: A pilot study. Ann Pharmacother
2022; 56:773–781
146. Medlej K, Kazzi AA, El Hajj Chehade A, et al: Complications
from administration of vasopressors through peripheral venous catheters: An observational study. J Emerg Med 2018;
54:47–53
147. Munroe ES: A case for the evidence-based use of peripheral
vasopressors. Chest 2024; 165:236–238
148. Chopra V, Flanders SA, Saint S, et al; Michigan
Appropriateness Guide for Intravenouse Catheters (MAGIC)
Panel: The michigan appropriateness guide for intravenous
catheters (MAGIC): Results from a multispecialty panel
using the RAND/UCLA appropriateness method. Ann Intern
Med 2015; 163(6 Suppl):S1–40
149. LeDoux D, Astiz ME, Carpati CM, et al: Effects of perfusion
pressure on tissue perfusion in septic shock. Crit Care Med
2000; 28:2729–2732

72     www.ccmjournal.org

150. Meng L, Wang Y, Zhang L, et al: Heterogeneity and variability in pressure autoregulation of organ blood flow:
lessons learned over 100+ years. Crit Care Med 2019;
47:436–448
151. Asfar P, Meziani F, Hamel J-F, et al; SEPSISPAM Investigators:
High versus low blood-pressure target in patients with septic
shock. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:1583–1593
152. Hylands M, Moller MH, Asfar P, et al: A systematic review of
vasopressor blood pressure targets in critically ill adults with
hypotension. Can J Anaesth 2017; 64:703–715
153. Lamontagne F, Richards-Belle A, Thomas K, et al; 65 trial
investigators: Effect of reduced exposure to vasopressors on
90-day mortality in older critically ill patients with vasodilatory hypotension: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;
323:938–949
154. Angriman F, Momenzade N, Adhikari NKJ, et al: Blood
pressure targets for adults with vasodilatory shock - An
individual patient data meta-analysis. NEJM Evid 2025;
4:EVIDoa2400359
155. Endo A, Yamakawa K, Tagami T, et al; OPTPRESS trial investigators: Efficacy of targeting high mean arterial pressure for
older patients with septic shock (OPTPRESS): A multicentre,
pragmatic, open-label, randomised controlled trial. Intensive
Care Med 2025; 51:883–892
156. Misango D, Pattnaik R, Baker T, et al; Global Intensive Care
Working Group: Haemodynamic assessment and support in
sepsis and septic shock in resource-limited settings. Trans R
Soc Trop Med Hyg 2017; 111:483–489
157. Ferrer R, Artigas A, Suarez D, et al; Edusepsis Study Group:
Effectiveness of treatments for severe sepsis: A prospective,
multicenter, observational study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2009; 180:861–866
158. Kalil AC, Johnson DW, Lisco SJ, et al: Early goal-directed
therapy for sepsis: A novel solution for discordant survival
outcomes in clinical trials. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:607–614
159. Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC, et al: Time to treatment
and mortality during mandated emergency care for sepsis. N
Engl J Med 2017; 376:2235–2244
160. Klompas M, Calandra T, Singer M: Antibiotics for sepsisfinding the equilibrium. JAMA 2018; 320:1433–1434
161. Prescott HC, Iwashyna TJ: Improving sepsis treatment by
embracing diagnostic uncertainty. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2019;
16:426–429
162. Slimings C, Riley TV: Antibiotics and healthcare facilityassociated Clostridioides difficile infection: Systematic review
and meta-analysis 2020 update. J Antimicrob Chemother
2021; 76:1676–1688
163. Tamma PD, Avdic E, Li DX, et al: Association of adverse
events with antibiotic use in hospitalized patients. JAMA
Intern Med 2017; 177:1308–1315
164. Klein Klouwenberg PM, Cremer OL, van Vught LA, et al:
Likelihood of infection in patients with presumed sepsis at
the time of intensive care unit admission: A cohort study. Crit
Care 2015; 19:319
165. Heffner AC, Horton JM, Marchick MR, et al: Etiology of
illness in patients with severe sepsis admitted to the hospital from the emergency department. Clin Infect Dis 2010;
50:814–820

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
166. Contou D, Roux D, Jochmans S, et al: Septic shock with no
diagnosis at 24 hours: a pragmatic multicenter prospective
cohort study. Crit Care 2016; 20:360
167. Shappell CN, Yu T, Klompas M, et al: Frequency of antibiotic
overtreatment and associated harms in patients presenting
with suspected sepsis to the emergency department: A retrospective cohort study. Clin Infect Dis 2025; 80:1197–1207
168. Hooper GA, Klippel CJ, McLean SR, et al: Concordance between initial presumptive and final adjudicated diagnoses
of infection among patients meeting sepsis-3 criteria in the
emergency department. Clin Infect Dis 2023; 76:2047–2055
169. Prescott HC, Seelye S, Wang XQ, et al: Temporal trends in
antimicrobial prescribing during hospitalization for potential
infection and sepsis. JAMA Intern Med 2022; 182:805–813
170. Leung LY, Huang H-L, Hung KK, et al: Door-to-antibiotic
time and mortality in patients with sepsis: Systematic review
and meta-analysis. Eur J Intern Med 2024; 129:48–61
171. Pak TR, Young J, McKenna CS, et al: Risk of misleading
conclusions in observational studies of time-to-antibiotics
and mortality in suspected sepsis. Clin Infect Dis 2023;
77:1534–1543
172. Hechtman RK, Kipnis P, Cano J, et al: Heterogeneity of benefit from earlier time-to-antibiotics for sepsis. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2024; 209:852–860
173. Alam N, Oskam E, Stassen PM, et al; PHANTASi Trial Investigators
and the ORCA (Onderzoeks Consortium Acute Geneeskunde)
Research Consortium the Netherlands: Prehospital antibiotics in
the ambulance for sepsis: A multicentre, open label, randomised
trial. Lancet Respir Med 2018; 6:40–50
174. Chalya PL, Mabula JB, Koy M, et al: Typhoid intestinal perforations at a University teaching hospital in Northwestern
Tanzania: A surgical experience of 104 cases in a resourcelimited setting. World J Emerg Surg 2012; 7:4
175. Phua J, Koh Y, Du B, et al; MOSAICS Study Group:
Management of severe sepsis in patients admitted to Asian
intensive care units: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2011;
342:d3245
176. Thwaites, C.L., et al., Infection Management in Patients with
Sepsis and Septic Shock in Resource-Limited Settings.
in Sepsis Management in Resource-limited Settings, A.M.
Dondorp, M.W. Dunser, and M.J. Schultz, eds. Cham, CH,
2019: 163–84
177. Urayeneza O, Mujyarugamba P, Rukemba Z, et al; Sepsis
in Resource-Limited Nations Workgroup of the Surviving
Sepsis Campaign: Increasing evidence-based interventions
in patients with acute infections in a resource-limited setting:
A before-and-after feasibility trial in Gitwe, Rwanda. Crit Care
Med 2018; 46:1357–1366
178. Yokota PK, Marra AR, Martino MDV, et al: Impact of appropriate antimicrobial therapy for patients with severe sepsis
and septic shock--a quality improvement study. PLoS One
2014; 9:e104475
179. Abdu M, Wilson A, Mhango C, et al: Resource availability for
the management of maternal sepsis in Malawi, other lowincome countries, and lower-middle-income countries. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 2018; 140:175–183
180. Baelani I, Jochberger S, Laimer T, et al: Availability of critical
care resources to treat patients with severe sepsis or septic

Critical Care Medicine

shock in Africa: A self-reported, continent-wide survey of anaesthesia providers. Crit Care 2011; 15:R10
181. Bataar O, Lundeg G, Tsenddorj G, et al; Helfen Berührt Study
Team: Nationwide survey on resource availability for implementing current sepsis guidelines in Mongolia. Bull World
Health Organ 2010; 88:839–846
182. Machado FR, Cavalcanti AB, Bozza FA, et al; SPREAD
Investigators: The epidemiology of sepsis in Brazilian intensive care units (the Sepsis PREvalence Assessment
Database, SPREAD): An observational study. Lancet Infect
Dis 2017; 17:1180–1189
183. Taniguchi LU, Azevedo Luciano Cesar Pontes de, Bozza
FA, et al: Availability of resources to treat sepsis in Brazil:
A random sample of Brazilian institutions. Rev Bras Ter
Intensiva 2019; 31:193–201
184. Thwaites L, Nasa P, Abbenbroek B, et al: Management of
adult sepsis in resource-limited settings: Global expert consensus statements using a Delphi method. Intensive Care
Med 2025; 51:21–38
185. Girotra S, Dukes KC, Sperling J, et al: Emergency medical
service agency practices and cardiac arrest survival. JAMA
Cardiol 2024; 9:683–691
186. Muchnok D, Vargo A, Deeb A-P, et al: Association of prehospital needle decompression with mortality among injured
patients requiring emergency chest decompression. JAMA
Surg 2022; 157:934–940
187. Nakayama N, Yamamoto T, Kikuchi M, et al; Japan Resuscitation
Council (JRC) Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) Task Force
and the Guideline Editorial Committee on behalf of the
Japanese Circulation Society (JCS) Emergency and Critical
Care Committee: Prehospital administration of aspirin and nitroglycerin for patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome
- A systematic review. Circ Rep 2022; 4:449–457
188. Philipsen SPJ, Vergunst AA, Tan E: Traction splinting for midshaft femoral fractures in the pre-hospital and emergency
department environment-A systematic review. Injury 2022;
53:4129–4138
189. Varney J, Motawea KR, Kandil OA, et al: Prehospital administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics for sepsis patients: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Sci Rep 2022;
5:e582
190. Poynter MJ, Farrugia A, Kelly E, et al: Prehospital administration of antibiotics in addition to usual care versus usual
care alone for patients with suspected sepsis – a systematic
review. Paramedicine 2023; 21:52–65
191. Jones J, Allen S, Davies J, et al: Randomised feasibility study
of prehospital recognition and antibiotics for emergency
patients with sepsis (PhRASe). Sci Rep 2021; 11:18586
192. Chamberlain D: Prehospital administered intravenous antimicrobial protocol for septic shock: A prospective randomized
clinical trial. Crit Care 2009; 13(Suppl 1):P317
193. Kotnarin R, Sirinawee P, Supasaovapak J: Impact of prehospital antibiotics on in-hospital mortality in emergency medical
service patients with sepsis. Open Access Emerg Med 2023;
15:199–206
194. Seymour CW, Kahn JM, Martin-Gill C, et al: Delays From First
Medical Contact to Antibiotic Administration for Sepsis. Crit
Care Med 2017; 45:759–765

www.ccmjournal.org     73

Prescott et al
195. Lagunes L, Encina B, Ramirez-Estrada S: Current understanding in source control management in septic shock
patients: a review. Ann Transl Med 2016; 4:330
196. Jimenez MF, Marshall JC, International Sepsis F: Source
control in the management of sepsis. Intensive Care Med
2001; 27(Suppl 1):S49–S62
197. De Waele JJ, Girardis M, Martin-Loeches I: Source control in
the management of sepsis and septic shock. Intensive Care
Med 2022; 48:1799–1802
198. Azuhata T, Kinoshita K, Kawano D, et al: Time from admission
to initiation of surgery for source control is a critical determinant of survival in patients with gastrointestinal perforation
with associated septic shock. Crit Care 2014; 18:R87
199. Bloos F, Thomas-Rüddel D, Rüddel H, et al; MEDUSA Study
Group: Impact of compliance with infection management
guidelines on outcome in patients with severe sepsis: A prospective observational multi-center study. Crit Care 2014;
18:R42
200. Bloos F, Rüddel H, Thomas-Rüddel D, et al; MEDUSA
study group: Effect of a multifaceted educational intervention for anti-infectious measures on sepsis mortality:
A cluster randomized trial. Intensive Care Med 2017;
43:1602–1612
201. De Pascale G, Antonelli M, Deschepper M, et al; Abdominal
Sepsis Study (AbSeS) group and the Trials Group of the
European Society of Intensive Care Medicine: Poor timing
and failure of source control are risk factors for mortality in
critically ill patients with secondary peritonitis. Intensive Care
Med 2022; 48:1593–1606
202. Karvellas CJ, Dong V, Abraldes JG, et al: The impact of
delayed source control and antimicrobial therapy in 196
patients with cholecystitis-associated septic shock: A cohort
analysis. Can J Surg 2019; 62:189–198
203. Kim H, Chung SP, Choi S-H, et al; Korean Shock Society
(KoSS) Investigators: Impact of timing to source control in
patients with septic shock: A prospective multi-center observational study. J Crit Care 2019; 53:176–182
204. Martinez ML, Ferrer R, Torrents E, et al; Edusepsis Study
Group: Impact of source control in patients with severe
sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:11–19
205. Naqvi F, Jain P, Umer A, et al: Outcomes of patients with
sepsis and septic shock requiring source control: A prospective observational single-center study. Crit Care Explor 2022;
4:e0807
206. Onal U, Akyol Seyhan D, Ketenoğlu OB, et al: Importance of
source control in the subgroup of intra-abdominal infections
for septic shock patients: Analysis of 390 cases. Mediterr J
Hematol Infect Dis 2024; 16:e2024051
207. Reitz KM, Kennedy J, Li SR, et al: Association between time
to source control in sepsis and 90-day mortality. JAMA Surg
2022; 157:817–826
208. Ruddel H, Thomas-Rüddel DO, Reinhart K, et al; MEDUSA
study group: Adverse effects of delayed antimicrobial treatment and surgical source control in adults with sepsis:
Results of a planned secondary analysis of a clusterrandomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2022; 26:51
209. Solomkin JS, Mazuski JE, Bradley JS, et al: Diagnosis and
management of complicated intra-abdominal infection
in adults and children: guidelines by the surgical infection
74     www.ccmjournal.org

society and the infectious diseases society of America. Clin
Infect Dis 2010; 50:133–164
210. Huston JM, Barie PS, Dellinger EP, et al; Therapeutics and
Guidelines Committee: The surgical infection society guidelines on the management of intra-abdominal infection: 2024
update. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2024; 25:419–435
211. Coccolini F, Sartelli M, Sawyer R, et al: Source control in
emergency general surgery: WSES, GAIS, SIS-E, SIS-A
guidelines. World J Emerg Surg 2023; 18:41
212. Duane TM, Huston JM, Collom M, et al: Surgical infection society 2020 updated guidelines on the management of complicated skin and soft tissue infections. Surg Infect (Larchmt)
2021; 22:383–399
213. Kranz J, Bartoletti R, Bruyère F, et al: European association
of urology guidelines on urological infections: Summary of
the 2024 guidelines. Eur Urol 2024; 86:27–41
214. Bodilsen J, D'Alessandris QG, Humphreys H, et al;
ESCMID Study Group for Infections of the Brain (ESGIB):
European society of clinical microbiology and infectious
diseases guidelines on diagnosis and treatment of brain
abscess in children and adults. Clin Microbiol Infect 2024;
30:66–89
215. Magiorakos AP, Srinivasan A, Carey RB, et al: Multidrugresistant, extensively drug-resistant and pandrug-resistant
bacteria: An international expert proposal for interim standard
definitions for acquired resistance. Clin Microbiol Infect 2012;
18:268–281
216. Paul M, Carrara E, Retamar P, et al: European society of
clinical microbiology and infectious diseases (ESCMID)
guidelines for the treatment of infections caused by
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli (endorsed by
European society of intensive care medicine). Clin Microbiol
Infect 2022; 28:521–547
217. Vincent JL, Sakr Y, Singer M, et al; EPIC III Investigators:
Prevalence and outcomes of infection among patients in intensive care units in 2017. JAMA 2020; 323:1478–1487
218. Rhee C, Kadri SS, Dekker JP, et al; CDC Prevention
Epicenters Program: Prevalence of antibiotic-resistant
pathogens in culture-proven sepsis and outcomes associated with inadequate and broad-spectrum empiric antibiotic
use. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3:e202899
219. Liu X, Liu Xi, Jin C, et al: Prediction models for diagnosis
and prognosis of the colonization or infection of multidrugresistant organisms in adults: A systematic review, critical
appraisal, and meta-analysis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2024;
30:1364–1373
220. Aliberti S, Reyes LF, Faverio P, et al; GLIMP investigators:
Global initiative for meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
pneumonia (GLIMP): An international, observational cohort
study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 16:1364–1376
221. Labricciosa FM, Sartelli M, Abbo LM, et al: Epidemiology and
risk factors for isolation of multi-drug-resistant organisms in
patients with complicated intra-abdominal infections. Surg
Infect (Larchmt) 2018; 19:264–272
222. Callejo-Torre F, Eiros Bouza JM, Olaechea Astigarraga P, et
al: Risk factors for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus colonisation or infection in intensive care units and their
reliability for predicting MRSA on ICU admission. Infez Med
2016; 24:201–209
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
223. Aydemir H, Akduman D, Piskin N, et al: Colistin vs. the combination of colistin and rifampicin for the treatment of carbapenemresistant Acinetobacter baumannii ventilator-associated
pneumonia. Epidemiol Infect 2013; 141:1214–1222
224. Wagenlehner FM, Umeh O, Steenbergen J, et al: Ceftolozanetazobactam compared with levofloxacin in the treatment of
complicated urinary-tract infections, including pyelonephritis:
A randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial (ASPECT-cUTI).
Lancet 2015; 385:1949–1956
225. Solomkin J, Hershberger E, Miller B, et al: Ceftolozane/tazobactam plus metronidazole for complicated intra-abdominal
infections in an era of multidrug resistance: Results from a
randomized, double-blind, phase 3 trial (ASPECT-cIAI). Clin
Infect Dis 2015; 60:1462–1471
226. Seo YB, Lee J, Kim YK, et al: Randomized controlled trial
of piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime and ertapenem for the
treatment of urinary tract infection caused by extendedspectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli. BMC
Infect Dis 2017; 17:404
227. Carmeli Y, Armstrong J, Laud PJ, et al: Ceftazidime-avibactam
or best available therapy in patients with ceftazidime-resistant
Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa complicated urinary tract infections or complicated intra-abdominal
infections (REPRISE): A randomised, pathogen-directed,
phase 3 study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 16:661–673
228. Wunderink RG, Matsunaga Y, Ariyasu M, et al: Cefiderocol
versus high-dose, extended-infusion meropenem for
the treatment of Gram-negative nosocomial pneumonia
(APEKS-NP): A randomised, double-blind, phase 3, noninferiority trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2021; 21:213–225
229. Wunderink RG, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Rahav G, et al:
Effect and safety of meropenem-vaborbactam versus bestavailable therapy in patients with carbapenem-resistant
enterobacteriaceae infections: The TANGO II randomized
clinical trial. Infect Dis Ther 2018; 7:439–455
230. Wagenlehner FM, Sobel JD, Newell P, et al: Ceftazidimeavibactam versus doripenem for the treatment of complicated urinary tract infections, including acute pyelonephritis:
RECAPTURE, a phase 3 randomized trial program. Clin
Infect Dis 2016; 63:754–762
231. Portsmouth S, van Veenhuyzen D, Echols R, et al: Cefiderocol
versus imipenem-cilastatin for the treatment of complicated
urinary tract infections caused by Gram-negative uropathogens: A phase 2, randomised, double-blind, non-inferiority
trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2018; 18:1319–1328
232. Bassetti M, Echols R, Matsunaga Y, et al: Efficacy and safety
of cefiderocol or best available therapy for the treatment of
serious infections caused by carbapenem-resistant Gramnegative bacteria (CREDIBLE-CR): A randomised, openlabel, multicentre, pathogen-focused, descriptive, phase 3
trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2021; 21:226–240
233. Carey GB, Holleck JL, Ein Alshaeba S, et al: Estimated mortality with early empirical antibiotic coverage of methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus in hospitalized patients with
bacterial infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Antimicrob Chemother 2023; 78:1150–1159
234. Jernigan JA, Hatfield KM, Wolford H, et al: Multidrugresistant bacterial infections in U.S. hospitalized patients,
2012-2017. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:1309–1319
Critical Care Medicine

235. Collaborators, G.B.D.A.R.: Global burden of bacterial antimicrobial resistance 1990-2021: A systematic analysis with
forecasts to 2050. Lancet 2024; 404:1199–1226
236. Rhee C, Chen T, Kadri SS, et al; CDC Prevention Epicenters
Program: Trends in empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic use for
suspected community-onset sepsis in US hospitals. JAMA
Netw Open 2024; 7:e2418923
237. Tamma PD, Heil EL, Justo JA, Mathers AJ, Satlin MJ, Bonomo
RA: Infectious diseases society of America 2024 guidance
on the treatment of antimicrobial-resistant gram-negative
infections. Clin Infect Dis 2024; 7:ciae403
238. Bassetti M, Righi E, Ansaldi F, et al: A multicenter study of
septic shock due to candidemia: Outcomes and predictors of
mortality. Intensive Care Med 2014; 40:839–845
239. Kollef M, Micek S, Hampton N, et al: Septic shock attributed to Candida infection: Importance of empiric therapy and
source control. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:1739–1746
240. Magill SS, Edwards JR, Bamberg W, et al; Emerging
Infections Program Healthcare-Associated Infections and
Antimicrobial Use Prevalence Survey Team: Multistate pointprevalence survey of health care-associated infections. N
Engl J Med 2014; 370:1198–1208
241. Mean M, Marchetti O, Calandra T: Bench-to-bedside review:
Candida infections in the intensive care unit. Crit Care 2008;
12:204
242. Garey KW, Rege M, Pai MP, et al: Time to initiation of fluconazole therapy impacts mortality in patients with candidemia:
A multi-institutional study. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43:25–31
243. Marriott DJ, Playford EG, Chen S, et al; Australian
Candidaemia Study: Determinants of mortality in nonneutropenic ICU patients with candidaemia. Crit Care 2009;
13:R115
244. Morrell M, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH: Delaying the empiric
treatment of Candida bloodstream infection until positive
blood culture results are obtained: A potential risk factor
for hospital mortality. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005;
49:3640–3645
245. Thomas-Ruddel DO, Schlattmann P, Pletz M, et al: Risk factors for invasive Candida infection in critically ill patients:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2022;
161:345–355
246. Cortegiani A, Russotto V, Maggiore A, et al: Antifungal
agents for preventing fungal infections in non-neutropenic
critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;
2016:CD004920
247. Timsit JF, Azoulay E, Schwebel C, et al; EMPIRICUS Trial
Group: Empirical micafungin treatment and survival without
invasive fungal infection in adults with ICU-acquired
sepsis, Candida colonization, and multiple organ failure:
The EMPIRICUS randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016;
316:1555–1564
248. Cornely OA, Sprute R, Bassetti M, et al: Global guideline for
the diagnosis and management of candidiasis: An initiative
of the ECMM in cooperation with ISHAM and ASM. Lancet
Infect Dis 2025; 25:e280–e293
249. Cobo F, Pérez-Carrasco V, Rodríguez-Granger J, et al:
Differences between bloodstream infections involving
gram-positive and gram-negative anaerobes. Anaerobe
2023; 81:102734
www.ccmjournal.org     75

Prescott et al
250. Murai Y, Nagaoka K, Iwanaga N, et al: Effects of extended
anaerobic antibiotic coverage on anaerobic bloodstream infection: A multisite retrospective study. Int J Infect Dis 2025;
153:107840
251. Buckman SA, Turnbull IR, Mazuski JE: Empiric antibiotics for
sepsis. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2018; 19:147–154
252. Ngo JT, Parkins MD, Gregson DB, et al: Population-based
assessment of the incidence, risk factors, and outcomes
of anaerobic bloodstream infections. Infection 2013;
41:41–48
253. Mortensen KK, Nielsen HL, Sogaard KK: Clinical and microbiological characteristics of anaerobic bacteremia during 1994-2019: A Danish population-based cohort study.
Anaerobe 2024; 89:102898
254. Petersen MW, Perner A, Jonsson AB, et al: Empirical metronidazole for patients with severe bacterial infection: A
systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential
analysis. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2019; 63:802–813
255. Kullberg RFJ, Schinkel M, Wiersinga WJ: Empiric antianaerobic antibiotics are associated with adverse clinical
outcomes in emergency department patients. Eur Respir J
2023; 61:2300413
256. Chanderraj R, Admon AJ, He Y, et al: Mortality of patients with
sepsis administered piperacillin-tazobactam vs cefepime.
JAMA Intern Med 2024; 184:769–777
257. Chanderraj R, Baker JM, Kay SG, et al: In critically ill patients,
anti-anaerobic antibiotics increase risk of adverse clinical
outcomes. Eur Respir J 2023; 61:2200910
258. Qian ET, Casey JD, Wright A, et al; Vanderbilt Center for
Learning Healthcare and the Pragmatic Critical Care
Research Group: Cefepime vs piperacillin-tazobactam in
adults hospitalized with acute infection: The ACORN randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2023; 330:1557–1567
259. Metlay JP, Waterer GW, Long AC, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of adults with community-acquired pneumonia. An
official clinical practice guideline of the American thoracic
society and infectious diseases society of America. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 200:e45–e67
260. Mazuski JE, Tessier JM, May AK, et al: The surgical infection society revised guidelines on the management of intraabdominal infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2017; 18:1–76
261. Kullberg RFJ, Haak BW, Chanderraj R, et al: Empirical antibiotic therapy for sepsis: Save the anaerobic microbiota.
Lancet Respir Med 2025; 13:92–100
262. Ferrara F, Castagna T, Pantolini B, et al: The challenge of
antimicrobial resistance (AMR): Current status and future
prospects. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 2024;
397:9603–9615
263. Spoto S, Daniel Markley J, Valeriani E, et al: Active surveillance cultures and procalcitonin in combination with
clinical data to guide empirical antimicrobial therapy in hospitalized medical patients with sepsis. Front Microbiol 2022;
13:797932
264. Verdugo-Paiva F, Otaiza F, Roson-Rodríguez P, et al: Effects
of screening strategies to detect carbapenem-resistant
gram-negative bacteria: A systematic review. Am J Infect
Control 2022; 50:1381–1388
265. Tomczyk S, Zanichelli V, Grayson ML, et al: Control of
carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae, Acinetobacter
76     www.ccmjournal.org

baumannii, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in healthcare
facilities: A systematic review and reanalysis of quasiexperimental studies. Clin Infect Dis 2019; 68:873–884
266. Brusselaers N, Labeau S, Vogelaers D, et al: Value of lower
respiratory tract surveillance cultures to predict bacterial
pathogens in ventilator-associated pneumonia: Systematic
review and diagnostic test accuracy meta-analysis. Intensive
Care Med 2013; 39:365–375
267. Antimicrobial Resistance C: Global burden of bacterial antimicrobial resistance in 2019: A systematic analysis. Lancet
2022; 399:629–655
268. Bouzid D, Zanella M-C, Kerneis S, et al: Rapid diagnostic
tests for infectious diseases in the emergency department.
Clin Microbiol Infect 2021; 27:182–191
269. Anton-Vazquez V, Hine P, Krishna S, et al: Rapid versus
standard antimicrobial susceptibility testing to guide treatment of bloodstream infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2021; 5:CD013235
270. Caspar Y, Deves A, Richarme C, et al: Clinical impact and
cost-consequence analysis of ePlex(R) blood culture identification panels for the rapid diagnosis of bloodstream infections: A single-center randomized controlled trial. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 2024; 43:1193–1203
271. Peri AM, Chatfield MD, Ling W, et al: Rapid diagnostic tests
and antimicrobial stewardship programs for the management
of bloodstream infection: What is their relative contribution to
improving clinical outcomes? A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2024; 79:502–515
272. Balan AM, Bodolea C, Nemes A, et al: Rapid point-of-care
PCR testing of drug-resistant strains on endotracheal aspirate samples: A repurposed effective tool in the stepwise
approach of healthcare-acquired pneumonia-A pilot study.
Int J Mol Sci 2023; 24:13393
273. Enne VI, Stirling S, Barber JA, et al; INHALE WP3 Study
Group and Committees: INHALE WP3, a multicentre,
open-label, pragmatic randomised controlled trial assessing the impact of rapid, ICU-based, syndromic PCR, versus
standard-of-care on antibiotic stewardship and clinical outcomes in hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2025; 51:272–286
274. Timbrook TT, Morton JB, McConeghy KW, et al: The effect
of molecular rapid diagnostic testing on clinical outcomes
in bloodstream infections: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 64:15–23
275. Hamill RJ: Amphotericin B formulations: A comparative review of efficacy and toxicity. Drugs 2013; 73:919–934
276. Levine MT, Chandrasekar PH: Adverse effects of voriconazole: Over a decade of use. Clin Transplant 2016;
30:1377–1386
277. Pristov KE, Ghannoum MA: Resistance of Candida to azoles
and echinocandins worldwide. Clin Microbiol Infect 2019;
25:792–798
278. Perlin DS, Rautemaa-Richardson R, Alastruey-Izquierdo A:
The global problem of antifungal resistance: Prevalence,
mechanisms, and management. Lancet Infect Dis 2017;
17:e383–e392
279. Bouza E, Almirante B, García Rodríguez J, et al: Biomarkers
of fungal infection: Expert opinion on the current situation.
Rev Esp Quimioter 2020; 33:1–10
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
280. Bloos F, Held J, Kluge S, et al; SepNet Study Group: (1 -->
3)-beta-D-Glucan-guided antifungal therapy in adults with
sepsis: The CandiSep randomized clinical trial. Intensive Care
Med 2022; 48:865–875
281. Mohd Hafiz AA, Staatz CE, Kirkpatrick CMJ, et al: Continuous
infusion vs. bolus dosing: implications for beta-lactam antibiotics. Minerva Anestesiol 2012; 78:94–104
282. Goncalves-Pereira, J, Povoa P: Antibiotics in critically ill
patients: A systematic review of the pharmacokinetics of
beta-lactams. Crit Care 2011; 15:R206
283. Abdul-Aziz MH, Lipman J, Akova M, et al; DALI Study
Group: Is prolonged infusion of piperacillin/tazobactam and
meropenem in critically ill patients associated with improved
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic and patient outcomes?
An observation from the defining antibiotic levels in intensive care unit patients (DALI) cohort. J Antimicrob Chemother
2016; 71:196–207
284. Dulhunty JM, Roberts JA, Davis JS, et al: Continuous infusion of beta-lactam antibiotics in severe sepsis: A multicenter double-blind, randomized controlled trial. Clin Infect
Dis 2013; 56:236–244
285. Abdul-Aziz MH, Hammond NE, Brett SJ, et al: Prolonged
vs intermittent infusions of beta-lactam antibiotics in adults
with sepsis or septic shock: A systematic review and metaanalysis. JAMA 2024; 332:638–648
286. Dulhunty JM, Brett SJ, De Waele JJ, et al; BLING III Study
Investigators: Continuous vs intermittent beta-lactam antibiotic infusions in critically ill patients with sepsis: The BLING
III randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2024; 332:629–637
287. De Waele JJ, Lipman J, Carlier M, et al: Subtleties in practical
application of prolonged infusion of beta-lactam antibiotics.
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2015; 45:461–463
288. Roberts JA, Paratz J, Paratz E, et al: Continuous infusion of
beta-lactam antibiotics in severe infections: A review of its
role. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2007; 30:11–18
289. Barton G, Rickard CM, Roberts JA: Continuous infusion of
beta-lactam antibiotics in critically ill patients with sepsis:
Implementation considerations. Intensive Care Med 2024;
50:2150–2153
290. Sieswerda E, Bax HI, Hoogerwerf JJ, et al: The 2021 dutch
working party on antibiotic policy (SWAB) guidelines for empirical antibacterial therapy of sepsis in adults. BMC Infect
Dis 2022; 22:687
291. Roberts JA, Abdul-Aziz MH, Lipman J, et al; International
Society of Anti-Infective Pharmacology and the
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics Study Group of
the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases: Individualised antibiotic dosing for patients who
are critically ill: Challenges and potential solutions. Lancet
Infect Dis 2014; 14:498–509
292. Roberts JA, Paul SK, Akova M, et al; DALI Study: DALI: defining antibiotic levels in intensive care unit patients: Are
current beta-lactam antibiotic doses sufficient for critically ill
patients? Clin Infect Dis 2014; 58:1072–1083
293. Veiga R, Paiva JA: Pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics
issues relevant for the clinical use of beta-lactam antibiotics
in critically ill patients. Crit Care 2018; 22:233
294. Nelson NR, Morbitzer KA, Jordan JD, et al: The impact of
capping creatinine clearance on achieving therapeutic
Critical Care Medicine

vancomycin concentrations in neurocritically ill patients with
traumatic brain injury. Neurocrit Care 2019; 30:126–131
295. Gregoire N, Marchand S, Ferrandière M, et al: Population
pharmacokinetics of daptomycin in critically ill patients with
various degrees of renal impairment. J Antimicrob Chemother
2019; 74:117–125
296. Ulldemolins M, Roberts JA, Rello J, et al: The effects of hypoalbuminaemia on optimizing antibacterial dosing in critically
ill patients. Clin Pharmacokinet 2011; 50:99–110
297. Choi G, Gomersall CD, Tian Q, et al: Principles of antibacterial dosing in continuous renal replacement therapy. Crit Care
Med 2009; 37:2268–2282
298. Roberts JA, Joynt GM, Lee A, et al; SMARRT Study
Collaborators and the ANZICS Clinical Trials Group: The
effect of renal replacement therapy and antibiotic dose on
antibiotic concentrations in critically ill patients: Data from
the multinational sampling antibiotics in renal replacement
therapy study. Clin Infect Dis 2021; 72:1369–1378
299. Bougle A, Dujardin O, Lepère V, et al: PHARMECMO:
Therapeutic drug monitoring and adequacy of current dosing
regimens of antibiotics in patients on extracorporeal life support. Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 2019; 38:493–497
300. Cheng V, Abdul-Aziz MH, Roberts JA, et al: Overcoming barriers to optimal drug dosing during ECMO in critically ill adult
patients. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2019; 15:103–112
301. Abdul-Aziz MH, Alffenaar JC, Bassetti M, et al; Infection
Section of European Society of Intensive Care Medicine
(ESICM): Antimicrobial therapeutic drug monitoring in critically ill adult patients: A Position Paper(). Intensive Care Med
2020; 46:1127–1153
302. Sanz-Codina M, Bozkir HO, Jorda A, et al: Individualized antimicrobial dose optimization: A systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Clin Microbiol Infect
2023; 29:845–857
303. Arulkumaran N, Routledge M, Schlebusch S, et al:
Antimicrobial-associated harm in critical care: A narrative review. Intensive Care Med 2020; 46:225–235
304. Schuts EC, Hulscher MEJL, Mouton JW, et al: Current evidence on hospital antimicrobial stewardship objectives: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2016;
16:847–856
305. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM, et al: Implementing an
antibiotic stewardship program: Guidelines by the infectious
diseases society of America and the society for healthcare
epidemiology of America. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 62:e51–e77
306. Tabah A, Bassetti M, Kollef MH, et al: Antimicrobial deescalation in critically ill patients: A position statement from
a task force of the European society of intensive care medicine (ESICM) and European society of clinical microbiology
and infectious diseases (ESCMID) critically ill patients study
group (ESGCIP). Intensive Care Med 2020; 46:245–265
307. Leone M, Bechis C, Baumstarck K, et al; AZUREA Network
Investigators: De-escalation versus continuation of empirical
antimicrobial treatment in severe sepsis: A multicenter nonblinded randomized noninferiority trial. Intensive Care Med
2014; 40:1399–1408
308. Lopez-Cortes LE, Delgado-Valverde M, Moreno-Mellado E,
et al; SIMPLIFY study group: Efficacy and safety of a structured de-escalation from antipseudomonal beta-lactams in
www.ccmjournal.org     77

Prescott et al
bloodstream infections due to Enterobacterales (SIMPLIFY):
An open-label, multicentre, randomised trial. Lancet Infect
Dis 2024; 24:375–385
309. Tabah A, Cotta MO, Garnacho-Montero J, et al: A systematic
review of the definitions, determinants, and clinical outcomes
of antimicrobial de-escalation in the intensive care unit. Clin
Infect Dis 2016; 62:1009–1017
310. NICE organization. Surveillance report 2018 – Antimicrobial
stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use (2015) NICE guideline NG15. Available
at:
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng15/resources/
surveillance-report-2018-antimicrobial-stewardship-systems-and-processes-for-effective-antimicrobial-medicineuse-2015-nice-guideline-ng15-pdf-6119358364357
Accessed July 18, 2025. 2018
311. De Bus L, Depuydt P, Steen J, et al; DIANA study group:
Antimicrobial de-escalation in the critically ill patient and
assessment of clinical cure: The DIANA study. Intensive Care
Med 2020; 46:1404–1417
312. Erb T, Mihai S, Strauß R, et al: beta-(1-->3)-D-glucan- and
mannan-guided early termination of antifungal therapy in
ICU patients: A randomized controlled study. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2023; 67:e0072523
313. De Pascale G, Posteraro B, D'Arrigo S, et al: (1,3)-beta-DGlucan-based empirical antifungal interruption in suspected invasive candidiasis: A randomized trial. Crit Care 2020; 24:550
314. Rouze A, Loridant S, Poissy J, et al; S-TAFE study group:
Biomarker-based strategy for early discontinuation of empirical antifungal treatment in critically ill patients: A randomized
controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2017; 43:1668–1677
315. Dark P, Hossain A, McAuley DF, et al; ADAPT-Sepsis
Collaborators: Biomarker-guided antibiotic duration for hospitalized patients with suspected sepsis: The ADAPT-sepsis
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2025; 333:682–693
316. Stoutenbeek CP, van Saene HK, Miranda DR, et al: The
effect of selective decontamination of the digestive tract on
colonisation and infection rate in multiple trauma patients.
Intensive Care Med 1984; 10:185–192
317. Oostdijk EA, de Smet AMGA, Blok HEM, et al: Ecological
effects of selective decontamination on resistant gramnegative bacterial colonization. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2010; 181:452–457
318. Buitinck S, Jansen R, Rijkenberg S, et al: The ecological
effects of selective decontamination of the digestive tract
(SDD) on antimicrobial resistance: A 21-year longitudinal
single-centre study. Crit Care 2019; 23:208
319. Hammond NE, Myburgh J, Seppelt I, et al: Association between selective decontamination of the digestive tract and
in-hospital mortality in intensive care unit patients receiving
mechanical ventilation: A systematic review and metaanalysis. JAMA 2022; 328:1922–1934
320. SuDdicu Investigators for the Australian New Zealand
Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials, G.; et al: Effect of selective decontamination of the digestive tract on hospital mortality in critically ill patients receiving mechanical ventilation:
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022; 328:1911–1921
321. Cuthbertson BH, Billot L, Campbell MK, et al: Selective decontamination of the digestive tract during ventilation in the
ICU. N Engl J Med 2025 Oct 29. [online first]
78     www.ccmjournal.org

322. Gershengorn HB, Garland A, Kramer A, et al: Variation of
arterial and central venous catheter use in United States intensive care units. Anesthesiology 2014; 120:650–664
323. Mahendra M, McQuillen P, Dudley RA, et al: Variation in arterial and central venous catheter use in pediatric intensive
care units. J Intensive Care Med 2021; 36:1250–1257
324. Wong T, et al.: Pragmatic randomized trial for arterial catheters in the critical care environment (GRACE) [abstract]. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 2024; 209:A4783
325. Gershengorn HB, Wunsch H, Scales DC, et al: Association
between arterial catheter use and hospital mortality in intensive care units. JAMA Intern Med 2014; 174:1746–1754
326. Barros A, Nguyen H, Lee H, et al: Effect of arterial catheter on vasopressor use in patients with shock: A propensity
score matching analysis on a multi-center prospective cohort. Chest 2020; 158:A642
327. Rasla S, Mohamed A, Qureshi R, et al: Association between
the use of arterial catheters and hospital outcomes in critically ill patients. Chest 2017; 152:A336
328. Ou Q, Cai G, Zhou Y, et al: Arterial catheterization and
in-hospital mortality in sepsis: A propensity score-matched
study. BMC Anesthesiol 2022; 22:178
329. Ribezzo S, Spina E, Di Bartolomeo S, et al: Noninvasive techniques for blood pressure measurement are not a reliable
alternative to direct measurement: A randomized crossover
trial in ICU. ScientificWorldJournal 2014; 2014:353628
330. Bur A, Hirschl MM, Herkner H, et al: Accuracy of oscillometric blood pressure measurement according to the relation
between cuff size and upper-arm circumference in critically
ill patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:371–376
331. Lakhal K, Macq C, Ehrmann S, et al: Noninvasive monitoring of blood pressure in the critically ill: Reliability according
to the cuff site (arm, thigh, or ankle). Crit Care Med 2012;
40:1207–1213
332. Riley LE, Chen GJ, Latham HE: Comparison of noninvasive
blood pressure monitoring with invasive arterial pressure
monitoring in medical ICU patients with septic shock. Blood
Press Monit 2017; 22:202–207
333. Haber EN, Sonti R, Simkovich SM, et al: Accuracy of noninvasive blood pressure monitoring in critically ill adults. J
Intensive Care Med 2024; 39:665–671
334. Lakhal K, Dauvergne JE, Kamel T, et al: Noninvasive monitoring of arterial pressure: finger or lower leg as alternatives to
the upper arm: A prospective study in three ICUs. Crit Care
Med 2023; 51:1350–1362
335. Kaufmann T, Cox EGM, Wiersema R, et al; SICS Study
Group: Non-invasive oscillometric versus invasive arterial
blood pressure measurements in critically ill patients: A post
hoc analysis of a prospective observational study. J Crit Care
2020; 57:118–123
336. Meidert AS, Dolch ME, Mühlbauer K, et al: Oscillometric
versus invasive blood pressure measurement in patients with
shock: A prospective observational study in the emergency
department. J Clin Monit Comput 2021; 35:387–393
337. Engelbrecht-Wiggans E, Palmer J, Hollis G, et al: Most
patients with non-hypertensive diseases at a critical care
resuscitation unit require arterial pressure monitoring: A
prospective observational study. World J Emerg Med 2023;
14:173–178
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
338. Macedo SK, Bissoli T, Dias LC, et al: Comparative study to
evaluate blood pressure levels measured by an invasive
method versus a non-invasive method in patients in an intensive care unit. Critical Care 2010; 14:P139
339. Tijsma L, et al: Non-invasive blood pressure measurements
versus invasive blood pressure measurements in critically
ill patients with shock. Intensive Care Medicine Experimental
2019; 7:92
340. Tran QK, Gelmann D, Alam Z, et al: Discrepancy between
invasive and noninvasive blood pressure measurements in
patients with sepsis by vasopressor status. West J Emerg
Med 2022; 23:358–367
341. Muller G, Contou D, Ehrmann S, et al: Deferring arterial catheterization in critically ill patients with shock. N Engl J Med
2025; 393:1875–1888
342. Hammond NE, Taylor C, Finfer S, et al; Fluid-TRIPS and
Fluidos Investigators: Patterns of intravenous fluid resuscitation use in adult intensive care patients between 2007
and 2014: An international cross-sectional study. PLoS One
2017; 12:e0176292
343. Hammond NE, Zampieri FG, Di Tanna GL, et al: Balanced
crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults - A systematic review with meta-analysis. NEJM Evid 2022;
1:EVIDoa2100010
344. Zampieri FG, Cavalcanti AB, Di Tanna GL, et al: Balanced
crystalloids versus saline for critically ill patients (BESTLiving): A systematic review and individual patient data metaanalysis. Lancet Respir Med 2024; 12:237–246
345. Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al; SMART Investigators
and the Pragmatic Critical Care Research Group: Balanced
crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults. N Engl J Med
2018; 378:829–839
346. Zampieri FG, Machado FR, Biondi RS, et al; BaSICS investigators and the BRICNet members: Effect of intravenous
fluid treatment with a balanced Solution vs 0.9% saline solution on mortality in critically ill patients: The BaSICS randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2021; 326:1–12
347. Finfer S, Micallef S, Hammond N, et al; PLUS Study
Investigators and the Australian New Zealand Intensive Care
Society Clinical Trials Group: Balanced multielectrolyte solution versus saline in critically ill adults. N Engl J Med 2022;
386:815–826
348. Jackson KE, Wang Li, Casey JD, et al; SMART Investigators
and the Pragmatic Critical Care Research Group: Effect of
early balanced crystalloids before ICU admission on sepsis
outcomes. Chest 2021; 159:585–595
349. Gelbenegger G, Shapiro NI, Zeitlinger M, et al: Lactated ringer’s or normal saline for initial fluid resuscitation in sepsisinduced hypotension. Crit Care Med 2025; 53:e1140–e1144
350. Zampieri FG, Machado FR, Biondi RS, et al: Association
between type of fluid received prior to enrollment, type of
admission, and effect of balanced crystalloid in critically ill
adults: A secondary exploratory analysis of the BaSICS clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2022; 205:1419–1428
351. Caironi P, Tognoni G, Masson S, et al; ALBIOS Study
Investigators: Albumin replacement in patients with severe
sepsis or septic shock. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:1412–1421
352. Bai Z, Lai Y, Han K, et al: Human albumin for adults with
sepsis: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis
Critical Care Medicine

of randomized controlled trials. Medicine (Baltim) 2024;
103:e40983
353. Geng L, Tian X, Gao Z, et al: Different concentrations of albumin versus crystalloid in patients with sepsis and septic
shock: A meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J
Intensive Care Med 2023; 38:679–689
354. Bannard-Smith J, Elrakhawy M, Norman G, et al: The efficacy,
safety and effectiveness of hyperoncotic albumin solutions in
patients with sepsis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Intensive Care Soc 2024; 25:308–318
355. Wang Y, Chen K, Li X, et al: Clinical efficacy of various resuscitation fluids in the management of sepsis in postoperative surgical and trauma patients: A systematic review and
meta--analysis. Wideochir Inne Tech Maloinwazyjne 2024;
19:275–288
356. Wiedermann CJ: Human albumin infusion in critically
ill and perioperative patients: Narrative rapid review of
meta-analyses from the last five years. J Clin Med 2023;
12:5919
357. Callum J, Skubas NJ, Bathla A, et al; International Collaboration
for Transfusion Medicine Guidelines Intravenous Albumin
Guideline Group: Use of intravenous albumin: A guideline
from the international collaboration for transfusion medicine
guidelines. Chest 2024; 166:321–338
358. Maiwall R, Kumar A, Pasupuleti SSR, et al: A randomizedcontrolled trial comparing 20% albumin to plasmalyte in
patients with cirrhosis and sepsis-induced hypotension
[ALPS trial]. J Hepatol 2022; 77:670–682
359. Gray AJ, Oatey K, Grahamslaw J, et al; Albumin, Balanced,
and Crystalloid-Sepsis (ABC-Sepsis) Investigators:
Albumin versus balanced crystalloid for the early resuscitation of sepsis: An open parallel-group randomized
feasibility trial- the ABC-sepsis trial. Crit Care Med 2024;
52:1520–1532
360. Park CHL, de Almeida JP, de Oliveira GQ, et al: Lactated
ringer’s versus 4% albumin on lactated ringer’s in early
sepsis therapy in cancer patients: A pilot single-center randomized trial. Crit Care Med 2019; 47:e798–e805
361. Annane D, Siami S, Jaber S, et al; CRISTAL Investigators:
Effects of fluid resuscitation with colloids vs crystalloids
on mortality in critically ill patients presenting with hypovolemic shock: The CRISTAL randomized trial. JAMA 2013;
310:1809–1817
362. Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al; SAFE Study Investigators:
A comparison of albumin and saline for fluid resuscitation in
the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:2247–2256
363. Diz JC, Luna-Rojas P, Díaz-Vidal P, et al: Effect of treatment
with balanced crystalloids versus normal saline on the mortality of critically ill patients with and without traumatic brain
injury: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesth Analg
2025; 141:152–161
364. Investigators SS, et al: Saline or albumin for fluid resuscitation in patients with traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med
2007; 357:874–884
365. Philips CA, Maiwall R, Sharma MK, et al: Comparison of 5%
human albumin and normal saline for fluid resuscitation in
sepsis induced hypotension among patients with cirrhosis
(FRISC study): A randomized controlled trial. Hepatol Int
2021; 15:983–994
www.ccmjournal.org     79

Prescott et al
366. Martin GS, Bassett P: Crystalloids vs. colloids for fluid resuscitation in the Intensive Care Unit: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Crit Care 2019; 50:144–154
367. Arabi YM, Belley-Cote E, Carsetti A, et al; European Society
of Intensive Care Medicine: European society of intensive
care medicine clinical practice guideline on fluid therapy in
adult critically ill patients. Part 1: The choice of resuscitation
fluids. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50:813–831
368. Chen C, Kollef MH: Targeted fluid minimization following initial resuscitation in septic shock: A pilot study. Chest 2015;
148:1462–1469
369. Corl KA, Prodromou M, Merchant RC, et al: The restrictive
IV fluid trial in severe sepsis and septic shock (RIFTS): A
randomized pilot study. Crit Care Med 2019; 47:951–959
370. Hjortrup PB, Haase N, Bundgaard H, et al; CLASSIC Trial
Group: Restricting volumes of resuscitation fluid in adults
with septic shock after initial management: The CLASSIC
randomised, parallel-group, multicentre feasibility trial.
Intensive Care Med 2016; 42:1695–1705
371. Macdonald SPJ, Keijzers G, Taylor DM, et al; REFRESH
trial investigators: Restricted fluid resuscitation in suspected sepsis associated hypotension (REFRESH): A
pilot randomised controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2018;
44:2070–2078
372. Semler MW, Janz DR, Casey JD, et al: Conservative fluid
management after sepsis resuscitation: A pilot randomized
trial. J Intensive Care Med 2020; 35:1374–1382
373. Jessen MK, Andersen LW, Thomsen MH, et al: Restrictive
fluids versus standard care in adults with sepsis in the emergency department (REFACED): A multicenter, randomized
feasibility trial. Acad Emerg Med 2022; 29:1172–1184
374. Meyhoff TS, Hjortrup PB, Wetterslev J, et al; CLASSIC Trial
Group: Restriction of intravenous fluid in ICU patients with
septic shock. N Engl J Med 2022; 386:2459–2470
375. Bednarczyk JM, Fridfinnson JA, Kumar A, et al: Incorporating
dynamic assessment of fluid responsiveness into goaldirected therapy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit
Care Med 2017; 45:1538–1545
376. Ehrman RR, Gallien JZ, Smith RK, et al: Resuscitation
guided by volume responsiveness does not reduce mortality in sepsis: A meta-analysis. Crit Care Explor 2019;
1:e0015
377. Azadian M, Win S, Abdipour A, et al: Mortality benefit from the
passive leg raise maneuver in guiding resuscitation of septic
shock patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. J Intensive Care Med 2022; 37:611–617
378. Douglas IS, Alapat PM, Corl KA, et al: Fluid response evaluation in sepsis hypotension and shock: A randomized clinical
trial. Chest 2020; 158:1431–1445
379. Basmaji J, Arntfield R, Desai K, et al: The impact of point-ofcare ultrasound-guided resuscitation on clinical outcomes in
patients with shock: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Crit Care Med 2024; 52:1661–1673
380. Stewart GN: Researches on the circulation time and on the
influences which affect it. J Physiol 1897; 22:159–183
381. Fegler G: Measurement of cardiac output in anaesthetized
animals by a thermodilution method. Q J Exp Physiol Cogn
Med Sci 1954; 39:153–164
80     www.ccmjournal.org

382. Fick A: Uber die messung des Blutquantums in den Hertzvent
rikeln. Sitzber Physik Med Ges Wurzburg 1870; 36:290–291
383. Velissaris D, Karamouzos V, Kotroni I, et al: The use of pulmonary artery catheter in sepsis patients: A literature review.
J Clin Med Res 2016; 8:769–776
384. Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Stevenson LW, et al: Impact of the pulmonary artery catheter in critically ill patients: meta-analysis
of randomized clinical trials. JAMA 2005; 294:1664–1670
385. Arya VK, Al-Moustadi W, Dutta V: Cardiac output monitoring - invasive and noninvasive. Curr Opin Crit Care 2022;
28:340–347
386. Hadian M, Pinsky MR: Evidence-based review of the use of
the pulmonary artery catheter: Impact data and complications. Crit Care 2006; 10(Suppl 3):S8
387. Scully TG, Grealy R, McLean AS, et al: Calibrated cardiac
output monitoring versus standard care for fluid management in the shocked ICU patient: A pilot randomised controlled trial. J Intensive Care 2019; 7:1
388. Ma S, Zhang R, Wang S, et al: Effect of global end diastolic
volume index guidance fluid resuscitation in elderly patients
with septic shock. Zhonghua Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue
2017; 29:486–490
389. Lu NF, Zheng R-Q, Lin H, et al: Improved sepsis bundles in
the treatment of septic shock: A prospective clinical study.
Am J Emerg Med 2015; 33:1045–1049
390. Hou PC, Filbin MR, Napoli A, et al: Cardiac output monitoring managing intravenous therapy (COMMIT) to treat
emergency department patients with sepsis. Shock 2016;
46:132–138
391. Kuan WS, Ibrahim I, Leong BSH, et al: Emergency department management of sepsis patients: A randomized, goaloriented, noninvasive sepsis trial. Ann Emerg Med 2016;
67:367–378.e3
392. Diaz-Gomez JL, Sharif S, Ablordeppey E, et al: Society of
critical care medicine guidelines on adult critical care ultrasonography: Focused update 2024. Crit Care Med 2025;
53:e447–e458
393. Levy B: Lactate and shock state: The metabolic view. Curr
Opin Crit Care 2006; 12:315–321
394. Ding XF, Yang Z-Y, Xu Z-T, et al: Early goal-directed and
lactate-guided therapy in adult patients with severe sepsis
and septic shock: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. J Transl Med 2018; 16:331
395. Pan J, Peng M, Liao C, et al: Relative efficacy and safety
of early lactate clearance-guided therapy resuscitation in
patients with sepsis: A meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltim)
2019; 98:e14453
396. Yumoto T, Kuribara T, Yamada K, et al: Clinical parameterguided initial resuscitation in adult patients with septic shock:
A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Acute Med
Surg 2023; 10:e914
397. Gu WJ, Zhang Z, Bakker J: Early lactate clearance-guided
therapy in patients with sepsis: A meta-analysis with trial
sequential analysis of randomized controlled trials. Intensive
Care Med 2015; 41:1862–1863
398. Simpson SQ, Gaines M, Hussein Y, et al: Early goal-directed
therapy for severe sepsis and septic shock: A living systematic review. J Crit Care 2016; 36:43–48
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
399. Baelani I, Jochberger S, Laimer T, et al: Identifying resource
needs for sepsis care and guideline implementation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo: A cluster survey of 66
hospitals in four eastern provinces. Middle East J Anaesthesiol
2012; 21:559–575
400. Hernandez G, Ospina-Tascón GA, Damiani LP, et al; The
ANDROMEDA SHOCK Investigators and the Latin America
Intensive Care Network (LIVEN): Effect of a resuscitation
strategy targeting peripheral perfusion status vs serum lactate levels on 28-day mortality among patients with septic
shock: The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 2019; 321:654–664
401. Shrestha GS, Kwizera A, Lundeg G, et al: International
Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines 2016: The perspective from low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet
Infect Dis 2017; 17:893–895
402. Morin A, Missri L, Urbina T, et al: Relationship between skin
microvascular blood flow and capillary refill time in critically
ill patients. Crit Care 2025; 29:57
403. Hernandez, G, Carmona P, Ait-Oufella H: Monitoring capillary refill time in septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2024;
50:580–582
404. Hansen M, Gillespie J, Riddick T, et al: Evaluation of electronic measurement of capillary refill for Sepsis screening at
ED triage. Am J Emerg Med 2023; 70:61–65
405. Jouffroy R, Saade A, Tourtier JP, et al: Skin mottling score and
capillary refill time to assess mortality of septic shock since
pre-hospital setting. Am J Emerg Med 2019; 37:664–671
406. Wang M, Tong M, Tian Z: Prolonged capillary refill time and
short-term mortality of critically ill patients: A meta-analysis.
Am J Emerg Med 2024; 79:127–135
407. Putowski Z, Gołdyn M, Pluta MP, et al: Correlation between
mean arterial pressure and capillary refill time in patients
with septic shock: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Intensive Care Med 2023; 38:838–846
408. Wesolek F, Putowski Z, Staniszewska W, et al: Capillary Refill
Time as a Part of Routine Physical Examination in Critically
Ill Patients Undergoing Vasoactive Therapy: A Prospective
Study. J Clin Med 2024; 13:5782
409. Raia L, Gabarre P, Bonny V, et al: Kinetics of capillary refill
time after fluid challenge. Ann Intensive Care 2022; 12:74
410. Castro R, Kattan E, Ferri G, et al: Effects of capillary refill
time-vs. lactate-targeted fluid resuscitation on regional, microcirculatory and hypoxia-related perfusion parameters in
septic shock: A randomized controlled trial. Ann Intensive
Care 2020; 10:150
411. Kattan E, Bakker J, Estenssoro E, et al: Hemodynamic
phenotype-based, capillary refill time-targeted resuscitation
in early septic shock: The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK-2 randomized clinical trial study protocol. Rev Bras Ter Intensiva
2022; 34:96–106
412. et al.; Andromeda-Shock-2 Investigators for the Andromeda
Research Network, S.S.o.A.R.: Personalized hemodynamic
resuscitation targeting capillary refill time in early septic
shock: The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK-2 randomized clinical
trial. JAMA 2025; 334:1988–1999
413. Russell JA: Bench-to-bedside review: Vasopressin in the
management of septic shock. Crit Care 2011; 15:226

Critical Care Medicine

414. Gordon AC, Mason AJ, Thirunavukkarasu N, et al; VANISH
Investigators: Effect of early vasopressin vs norepinephrine
on kidney failure in patients with septic shock: The VANISH
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 316:509–518
415. Hajjar LA, Zambolim C, Belletti A, et al: Vasopressin versus
norepinephrine for the management of septic shock in
cancer patients: The VANCS II randomized clinical trial. Crit
Care Med 2019; 47:1743–1750
416. Khanna A, English SW, Wang XS, et al; ATHOS-3
Investigators: Angiotensin II for the treatment of vasodilatory
shock. N Engl J Med 2017; 377:419–430
417. Chawla LS, Busse L, Brasha-Mitchell E, et al: Intravenous angiotensin II for the treatment of high-output shock (ATHOS
trial): a pilot study. Crit Care 2014; 18:534
418. Drugs.com. Comparing Levophed vs Vasopressin. Available
at: https://www.drugs.com/compare/levophed-vs-vasopressin Accessted July 22, 2025
419. Russell JA, Walley KR, Singer J, et al; VASST Investigators:
Vasopressin versus norepinephrine infusion in patients with
septic shock. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:877–887
420. Barzegar E, Ahmadi A, Mousavi S, et al: The therapeutic role
of vasopressin on improving lactate clearance during and
after vasogenic shock: Microcirculation, is it the black box?
Acta Med Iran 2016; 54:15–23
421. Dunser MW, Mayr AJ, Ulmer H, et al: Arginine vasopressin
in advanced vasodilatory shock: A prospective, randomized,
controlled study. Circulation 2003; 107:2313–2319
422. Hammond DA, Ficek OA, Painter JT, et al: Prospective openlabel trial of early concomitant vasopressin and norepinephrine therapy versus initial norepinephrine monotherapy in
septic shock. Pharmacotherapy 2018; 38:531–538
423. Lauzier F, Lévy B, Lamarre P, et al: Vasopressin or norepinephrine in early hyperdynamic septic shock: A randomized
clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2006; 32:1782–1789
424. Malay MB, Ashton RC, Landry DW, et al: Low-dose vasopressin in the treatment of vasodilatory septic shock. J
Trauma 1999; 47:699–703; discussion 703
425. Oliveira S, Dessa F, Rocha C, et al: Early vasopressin application in shock study. Crit Care 2014; 18(Suppl 1):P158
426. Fonseca-Ruiz NJ, Cano AL, Carmona DPO, et al: Uso de
vasopresina en pacientes con choque séptico refractario a
catecolaminas. Estudio piloto. Acta Colombiana de Cuidado
Intensivo 2013; 13:114–123
427. Nagendran M, Russell JA, Walley KR, et al: Vasopressin
in septic shock: an individual patient data meta-analysis
of randomised controlled trials. Intensive Care Med 2019;
45:844–855
428. Kalimouttou A, Kennedy JN, Feng J, et al: Optimal vasopressin initiation in septic shock: The OVISS reinforcement
learning study. JAMA 2025; 333:1688–1698
429. Chen C, Pang L, Wang Y, et al: Combination era, using combined vasopressors showed benefits in treating septic shock
patients: A network meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Ann Transl Med 2019; 7:535
430. Shi R, Hamzaoui O, De Vita N, et al: Vasopressors in septic
shock: Which, when, and how much? Ann Transl Med 2020;
8:794

www.ccmjournal.org     81

Prescott et al
431. Myburgh JA, Higgins A, Jovanovska A, et al; CAT Study
investigators: A comparison of epinephrine and norepinephrine in critically ill patients. Intensive Care Med 2008;
34:2226–2234
432. Belletti A, Benedetto U, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al: The effect of
vasoactive drugs on mortality in patients with severe sepsis
and septic shock. A network meta-analysis of randomized
trials. J Crit Care 2017; 37:91–98
433. Jia L, Wang P, Li C, et al: The efficacy and safety of vasopressors for septic shock patients: A systemic review and
network meta-analysis. Shock 2023; 60:746–752
434. Fernando SM, Tran A, Soliman K, et al: Methylene blue in
septic shock: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit
Care Explor 2024; 6:e1110
435. Luis-Silva F, Menegueti MG, Peres LM, et al: Methylene blue
therapy in addition to standard treatment for acute-phase
septic shock: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Front Med
(Lausanne) 2024; 11:1431321
436. Yune H, Kim K, Jo YH, et al: 1453: Infusion of methylene
blue in severe sepsis and septic shock: A randomized controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2016; 44:439–439
437. Lopez A, Lorente JA, Steingrub J, et al: Multiple-center,
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study of
the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor 546C88: Effect on survival in patients with septic shock. Crit Care Med 2004;
32:21–30
438. Ibarra-Estrada M, Kattan E, Aguilera-González P, et al: Early
adjunctive methylene blue in patients with septic shock: A
randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2023; 27:110
439. Hasegawa D, Ishisaka Y, Maeda T, et al: Prevalence and
prognosis of sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Intensive Care Med 2023;
38:797–808
440. Shvilkina T, Shapiro N: Sepsis-Induced myocardial dysfunction: Heterogeneity of functional effects and clinical significance. Front Cardiovasc Med 2023; 10:1200441
441. Dubin A, Mugno M: The effects of dobutamine in septic
shock: An updated narrative review of clinical and experimental studies. Medicina (Kaunas) 2024; 60:751
442. Tongyoo S, Chobngam S, Yolsiriwat N, et al: Effects of adjunctive milrinone versus placebo on hemodynamics in
patients with septic shock: A randomized controlled trial. Ann
Med 2025; 57:2484464
443. Scheeren TWL, Bakker J, Kaufmann T, et al: Current use
of inotropes in circulatory shock. Ann Intensive Care 2021;
11:21
444. Thongprayoon C, Cheungpasitporn W, Harrison AM, et al:
Temporal trends in the utilization of vasopressors in intensive
care units: An epidemiologic study. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol
2016; 17:19
445. Russell JA: Vasopressor therapy in critically ill patients with
shock. Intensive Care Med 2019; 45:1503–1517
446. Izcovich A, González Malla C, Manzotti M, et al: Midodrine for
orthostatic hypotension and recurrent reflex syncope: A systematic review. Neurology 2014; 83:1170–1177
447. House AA, McIntyre CW: Midodrine is an effective therapy
for resistant intradialytic hypotension: PRO. Kidney360
2023; 4:299–301
82     www.ccmjournal.org

448. Kilcommons SJ, Hammal F, Kamaleldin M, et al: Adjunctive
midodrine therapy for vasopressor-dependent shock in the
ICU: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med
2025; 53:e384–e399
449. Suzuki T, Morisaki H, Serita R, et al: Infusion of the betaadrenergic blocker esmolol attenuates myocardial dysfunction in septic rats. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:2294–2301
450. Rehberg S, Frank S, Černý V, et al; LANDI-SEP Study
Group: Landiolol for heart rate control in patients with
septic shock and persistent tachycardia. A multicenter
randomized clinical trial (Landi-SEP). Intensive Care Med
2024; 50:1622–1634
451. Whitehouse T, Hossain A, Perkins GD, et al; STRESS-L
Collaborators: Landiolol and organ failure in patients with
septic shock: The STRESS-L randomized clinical trial. JAMA
2023; 330:1641–1652
452. Morelli A, Ertmer C, Westphal M, et al: Effect of heart rate
control with esmolol on hemodynamic and clinical outcomes
in patients with septic shock: A randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 2013; 310:1683–1691
453. McChesney C, Orozco N, Fiorini K, et al: Impact of short-acting
beta-blockers on the outcomes of patients with septic shock:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2025;
53:e1125–e1139
454. Chaudhuri D, Lazarte J, Shah K, et al. Approaches to
converting Spo2/FIO2 ratio to PaO2/FIO2 ratio for assessment of respiratory failure in critically ill patients: A systematic review. Crit Care Med 2026 Jan 6. [online first]
455. Rice TW, Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, et al; National Institutes
of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ARDS
Network: Comparison of the SpO2/FIO2 ratio and the
PaO2/FIO2 ratio in patients with acute lung injury or ARDS.
Chest 2007; 132:410–417
456. Sjoding MW, Dickson RP, Iwashyna TJ, et al: Racial bias
in pulse oximetry measurement. N Engl J Med 2020;
383:2477–2478
457. Martin D, Johns C, Sorrell L, et al: Effect of skin tone on
the accuracy of the estimation of arterial oxygen saturation
by pulse oximetry: A systematic review. Br J Anaesth 2024;
132:945–956
458. Matthay MA, Arabi Y, Arroliga AC, et al: A new global definition of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2024; 209:37–47
459. Alipanah-Lechner N, Cavalcanti AB, Diaz J, et al: From berlin
to global: The need for syndromic definitions of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2024;
209:21–23
460. Barrot L, Asfar P, Mauny F, et al; LOCO2 Investigators and
REVA Research Network: Liberal or conservative oxygen
therapy for acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J
Med 2020; 382:999–1008
461. Gelissen H, de Grooth H-J, Smulders Y, et al: Effect of lownormal vs high-normal oxygenation targets on organ dysfunction in critically ill patients: A randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 2021; 326:940–948
462. Investigators I-R, et al.: Conservative oxygen therapy during mechanical ventilation in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2020;
382:989–998
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
463. Martin DS, McNeil M, Brew-Graves C, et al: A feasibility randomised controlled trial of targeted oxygen therapy in mechanically ventilated critically ill patients. J Intensive Care Soc
2021; 22:280–287
464. Martin DS, et al: Conservative oxygen therapy in mechanically ventilated critically ill adult patients: The UK-ROX randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2025; 334:398–408
465. Nielsen FM, Klitgaard TL, Siegemund M, et al; HOT-COVID
Trial Group: Lower vs higher oxygenation target and days
alive without life support in COVID-19: The HOT-COVID randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2024; 331:1185–1194
466. Panwar R, Hardie M, Bellomo R, et al; CLOSE Study
Investigators: Conservative versus liberal oxygenation targets for mechanically ventilated patients. A pilot multicenter
randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016;
193:43–51
467. Schjorring OL, Klitgaard TL, Perner A, et al; HOT-ICU
Investigators: Lower or higher oxygenation targets for
acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 2021;
384:1301–1311
468. van der Wal LI, Grim CCA, Del Prado MR, et al; ICONIC
investigators: Conservative versus liberal oxygenation targets in intensive care unit patients (ICONIC): A randomized
clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2023; 208:770–779
469. Semler MW, Casey JD, Lloyd BD, et al; PILOT Investigators
and the Pragmatic Critical Care Research Group: Oxygensaturation targets for critically ill adults receiving mechanical
ventilation. N Engl J Med 2022; 387:1759–1769
470. Nafae RM, Shouman W, Abdelmoneam SH, et al: Conservative
versus conventional oxygen therapy in type I acute respiratory failure patients in respiratory intensive care unit, Zagazig
University. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis 2023; 94
471. Moller MH, Granholm A, Al Duhailib Z, et al: Higher versus
lower oxygenation targets in adult ICU patients: A rapid practice guideline. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2024; 68:302–310
472. Klitgaard TL, Schjørring OL, Nielsen FM, et al: Higher versus
lower fractions of inspired oxygen or targets of arterial oxygenation for adults admitted to the intensive care unit.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023; 9:CD012631
473. Buell KG, Spicer AB, Casey JD, et al: Individualized treatment effects of oxygen targets in mechanically ventilated
critically ill adults. JAMA 2024; 331:1195–1204
474. Frat JP, Thille AW, Mercat A, et al; FLORALI Study Group:
High-flow oxygen through nasal cannula in acute hypoxemic
respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:2185–2196
475. Azoulay E, Lemiale V, Mokart D, et al: Effect of high-flow
nasal oxygen vs standard oxygen on 28-day mortality
in immunocompromised patients with acute respiratory
failure: The HIGH randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2018;
320:2099–2107
476. Andino R, Vega G, Pacheco SK, et al: High-flow nasal oxygen
reduces endotracheal intubation: A randomized clinical trial.
Ther Adv Respir Dis 2020; 14:1753466620956459
477. Ospina-Tascon GA, Calderón-Tapia LE, García AF, et al; HiFLoCovid Investigators: Effect of high-flow oxygen therapy vs
conventional oxygen therapy on invasive mechanical ventilation and clinical recovery in patients with severe COVID-19: A
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2021; 326:2161–2171
Critical Care Medicine

478. Alptekinoglu Mendil N, Temel S, Yüksel RC, et al: The use of
high-flow nasal oxygen vs. standard oxygen therapy in hematological malignancy patients with acute respiratory failure in
hematology wards. Turk J Med Sci 2021; 51:1756–1763
479. Frat JP, Quenot J-P, Badie J, et al; SOHO-COVID Study
Group and the REVA Network: Effect of high-flow nasal
cannula oxygen vs standard oxygen therapy on mortality in patients with respiratory failure due to COVID-19:
The SOHO-COVID randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022;
328:1212–1222
480. Perkins GD, Ji C, Connolly BA, et al; RECOVERY-RS
Collaborators: Effect of noninvasive respiratory strategies on
intubation or mortality among patients with acute hypoxemic
respiratory failure and COVID-19: The RECOVERY-RS randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022; 327:546–558
481. Thota B, Samantaray A, Vengamma B, et al: A randomised
controlled trial of high-flow nasal oxygen versus nonrebreathing oxygen face mask therapy in acute hypoxaemic
respiratory failure. Indian J Anaesth 2022; 66:644–650
482. Nazir N, Saxena A: The effectiveness of high-flow nasal cannula and standard non-rebreathing mask for oxygen therapy
in moderate category COVID-19 pneumonia: Randomised
controlled trial. Afr J Thorac Crit Care Med 2022; 28
483. Bouadma L, Mekontso-Dessap A, Burdet C, et al;
COVIDICUS Study Group: High-dose dexamethasone and
oxygen support strategies in intensive care unit patients
with severe COVID-19 acute hypoxemic respiratory failure:
The COVIDICUS randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med
2022; 182:906–916
484. Crimi C, Noto A, Madotto F, et al; COVID-HIGH Investigators:
High-flow nasal oxygen versus conventional oxygen therapy
in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia and mild hypoxaemia:
A randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2023; 78:354–361
485. Nair PR, Haritha D, Behera S, et al: Comparison of high-flow
nasal cannula and noninvasive ventilation in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure due to severe COVID-19 pneumonia.
Respir Care 2021; 66:1824–1830
486. Grieco DL, Menga LS, Cesarano M, et al; COVID-ICU
Gemelli Study Group: Effect of helmet noninvasive ventilation vs high-flow nasal oxygen on days free of respiratory
support in patients with COVID-19 and moderate to severe
hypoxemic respiratory failure: The HENIVOT randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 2021; 325:1731–1743
487. Al Hashim AH, Al Reesi A, Al Lawati NM, et al: Comparison
of noninvasive mechanical ventilation with high-flow nasal
cannula, face-mask, and helmet in hypoxemic respiratory
failure in patients with COVID-19: A randomized controlled
trial. Crit Care Med 2023; 51:1515–1526
488. Nagata K, Yokoyama T, Tsugitomi R, et al; JaNP-Hi Study
Investigators: Continuous positive airway pressure versus
high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy for acute hypoxemic
respiratory failure: A randomized controlled trial. Respirology
2024; 29:36–45
489. Investigators R, et al.: High-flow nasal oxygen vs noninvasive ventilation in patients with acute respiratory failure:
The RENOVATE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2025;
333:875–890
490. Elagamy AE, Taha SS, Elfawy DM: High flow nasal cannula
versus non-invasive ventilation in prevention of intubation
www.ccmjournal.org     83

Prescott et al
in immunocompromised patient with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. Egyptian Journal of Anaesthesia 2021;
37:432–439
491. Coudroy R, Frat J-P, Ehrmann S, et al; FLORALI-IM study
group and the REVA Research Network: High-flow nasal
oxygen alone or alternating with non-invasive ventilation in
critically ill immunocompromised patients with acute respiratory failure: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med
2022; 10:641–649
492. Botta M, Caritg O, van Meenen DMP, et al: Oxygen consumption with high-flow nasal oxygen versus mechanical
ventilation- an international multicenter observational study
in COVID-19 patients (PROXY-COVID). Am J Trop Med Hyg
2023; 108:1035–1041
493. Luo J, Pavlov I, Tavernier E, et al; Awake Prone Positioning
Meta-Analysis Group: Awake prone positioning in adults
with COVID-19: An individual participant data meta-analysis.
JAMA Intern Med 2025; 185:572–581
494. Alhazzani W, Parhar KKS, Weatherald J, et al; COVIPRONE Trial Investigators and the Saudi Critical Care
Trials Group: Effect of awake prone positioning on endotracheal intubation in patients with COVID-19 and acute
respiratory failure: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022;
327:2104–2113
495. Ehrmann S, Li J, Ibarra-Estrada M, et al; Awake Prone
Positioning Meta-Trial Group: Awake prone positioning for
COVID-19 acute hypoxaemic respiratory failure: A randomised, controlled, multinational, open-label meta-trial.
Lancet Respir Med 2021; 9:1387–1395
496. Fezzi M, Antolini L, Soria A, et al: Early prone positioning
does not improve the outcome of patients with mild pneumonia due to SARS-CoV-2: Results from an open-label randomised controlled trial - the EPCoT study. ERJ Open Res
2023; 9:00181–02023
497. Harris TRE, Bhutta ZA, Qureshi I, et al: A randomised clinical trial of awake prone positioning in COVID-19 suspects
with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. Contemp Clin Trials
Commun 2024; 39:101295
498. Fralick M, Colacci M, Munshi L, et al; COVID Prone Study
Investigators: Prone positioning of patients with moderate
hypoxaemia due to covid-19: Multicentre pragmatic randomised trial (COVID-PRONE). BMJ 2022; 376:e068585
499. Jayakumar D, Ramachandran Dnb P, Rabindrarajan Dnb E, et
al: Standard care versus awake prone position in adult nonintubated patients with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure
secondary to COVID-19 infection-A multicenter feasibility
randomized controlled trial. J Intensive Care Med 2021;
36:918–924
500. Johnson SA, Horton DJ, Fuller MJ, et al: Patient-directed
prone positioning in awake patients with COVID-19 requiring hospitalization (PAPR). Ann Am Thorac Soc 2021;
18:1424–1426
501. Kharat A, Dupuis-Lozeron E, Cantero C, et al: Self-proning
in COVID-19 patients on low-flow oxygen therapy: A
cluster randomised controlled trial. ERJ Open Res 2021;
7:00692–02020
502. Nay MA, Hindre R, Perrin C, et al: Prone position versus usual
care in hypoxemic COVID-19 patients in medical wards: A
randomised controlled trial. Crit Care 2023; 27:240
84     www.ccmjournal.org

503. Rampon G, Jia S, Agrawal R, et al: Smartphone-guided selfprone positioning vs usual care in nonintubated hospital
ward patients with COVID-19: A pragmatic randomized clinical trial. Chest 2022; 162:782–791
504. Taylor SP, Bundy H, Smith WM, et al: Awake prone positioning strategy for nonintubated hypoxic patients with COVID19: A pilot trial with embedded implementation evaluation.
Ann Am Thorac Soc 2021; 18:1360–1368
505. Gopalakrishnan M, Khichar S, Saurabh S, et al: Effectiveness
of early awake self proning strategy in non-intubated
patients with COVID-19 hypoxemia: An open-labelled randomized clinical trial from Jodhpur, India. Monaldi Arch Chest
Dis 2022; 93
506. Javed H, Qayyum F, Aslam Khan MN, et al: Effect of eight
hours per day of intermittent self prone positioning for seven
days on the severity of Covid-19 pneumonia/ acute respiratory distress syndrome. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad 2023;
35:68–75
507. Phong NT, Duc DH, Hai HB, et al; OUCRU COVID RESEACH
GROUP: Awake prone positioning effectiveness in moderate
to severe COVID-19 a randomized controlled trial. Wellcome
Open Res 2024; 9:543
508. Rosen J, von Oelreich E, Fors D, et al; PROFLO Study Group:
Awake prone positioning in patients with hypoxemic respiratory failure due to COVID-19: The PROFLO multicenter
randomized clinical trial. Crit Care 2021; 25:209
509. Nasrallah BZN, Mahmoud MS, ElGendy HMA, et al: Patients
self-proning with high-flow nasal cannula improves oxygenation in mild ARDS patients: A randomized clinical trial.
Anesthesia, Pain, & Intensive Care 2023; 27:351–355
510. Weatherald J, Parhar KKS, Al Duhailib Z, et al: Efficacy of
awake prone positioning in patients with covid-19 related
hypoxemic respiratory failure: Systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized trials. BMJ 2022; 379:e071966
511. de Haro C, Neto AS, Gomà G, et al: Effect of a low versus intermediate tidal volume strategy on pulmonary complications
in patients at risk of acute respiratory distress syndromea randomized clinical trial. Front Med (Lausanne) 2023;
10:1172434
512. Writing Group for the PI, et al.: Effect of a low vs intermediate
tidal volume strategy on ventilator-free days in intensive care
unit patients without ARDS: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA
2018; 320:1872–1880
513. Lanspa MJ, Gong MN, Schoenfeld DA, et al; The National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Prevention and Early
Treatment of Acute Lung Injury (PETAL) Clinical Trials
Network: Prospective assessment of the feasibility of a trial
of low-tidal volume ventilation for patients with acute respiratory failure. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2019; 16:356–362
514. Ferguson ND, Frutos-Vivar F, Esteban A, et al: Acute respiratory distress syndrome: Underrecognition by clinicians and
diagnostic accuracy of three clinical definitions. Crit Care
Med 2005; 33:2228–2234
515. Bellani G, Laffey JG, Pham T, et al; LUNG SAFE Investigators:
Epidemiology, patterns of care, and mortality for patients with
acute respiratory distress syndrome in intensive care units in
50 countries. JAMA 2016; 315:788–800
516. Umoh NJ, Fan E, Mendez-Tellez PA, et al: Patient and intensive care unit organizational factors associated with low tidal
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
volume ventilation in acute lung injury. Crit Care Med 2008;
36:1463–1468
517. Needham DM, Colantuoni E, Mendez-Tellez PA, et al: Lung
protective mechanical ventilation and two year survival in
patients with acute lung injury: Prospective cohort study.
BMJ 2012; 344:e2124
518. Pitre T, Drover K, Chaudhuri D, et al: Corticosteroids in
sepsis and septic shock: A systematic review, pairwise,
and dose-response meta-analysis. Crit Care Explor 2024;
6:e1000
519. Qadir N, Sahetya S, Munshi L, et al: An update on management of adult patients with acute respiratory distress
syndrome: An official american thoracic society clinical practice guideline. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2024;
209:24–36
520. Jones BE, Ramirez JA, Oren E, et al: Diagnosis and management of community-acquired pneumonia. An official
American thoracic society clinical practice guideline. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2026; 212:24–44
521. Venkatesh B, Finfer S, Cohen J, et al; ADRENAL Trial
Investigators and the Australian–New Zealand Intensive
Care Society Clinical Trials Group: Adjunctive glucocorticoid
therapy in patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med 2018;
378:797–808
522. Sakkat A, Alquraini M, Aljazeeri J, et al: Temperature control
in critically ill patients with fever: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Crit Care 2021; 61:89–95
523. Reintam Blaser A, Alhazzani W, Belley-Cote E, et al:
Intravenous vitamin C therapy in adult patients with sepsis:
A rapid practice guideline. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2023;
67:1423–1431
524. Agarwal A, Basmaji J, Fernando SM, et al: Parenteral Vitamin
C in patients with severe infection: A systematic review.
NEJM Evid 2022; 1:EVIDoa2200105
525. Anstey MH, Aljeaidi MS, Palmer R, et al: Intravenous vitamin
C for vasoplegia: A double-blinded randomised clinical trial
(VALENCIA trial). J Crit Care 2023; 78:154369
526. Belousoviene E, Pranskuniene Z, Vaitkaitiene E, et al: Effect
of high-dose intravenous ascorbic acid on microcirculation
and endothelial glycocalyx during sepsis and septic shock:
A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. BMC
Anesthesiol 2023; 23:309
527. Feng F, Yang H, Yang W, et al: Metabolic resuscitation therapy
in critically ill patients with sepsis and septic shock: A pilot
prospective randomized controlled trial. Open Med (Wars)
2023; 18:20230637
528. Li W, Zhao R, Liu S, et al: High-dose vitamin C improves
norepinephrine level in patients with septic shock: A singlecenter, prospective, randomized controlled trial. Medicine
(Baltim) 2024; 103:e37838
529. Mohamed A, Abdelaty M, Saad MO, et al: Evaluation of hydrocortisone, Vitamin C, and thiamine for the treatment of
septic shock: A randomized controlled trial (the Hyvits Trial).
Shock 2023; 59:697–701
530. Vijayaraghavan BKT, Venkataraman R, Ramanathan Y, et al:
A pilot feasibility randomized controlled trial of intravenous
vitamin c in adults with sepsis in the intensive care unit: The
lessening organ dysfunction with vitamin C-India (LOVITIndia) trial. Indian J Crit Care Med 2023; 27:910–916
Critical Care Medicine

531. Lamontagne F, Masse M-H, Menard J, et al; LOVIT
Investigators and the Canadian Critical Care Trials Group:
Intravenous Vitamin C in adults with sepsis in the intensive
care unit. N Engl J Med 2022; 386:2387–2398
532. Pan B, Sun P, Pei R, et al: Efficacy of IVIG therapy for patients
with sepsis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Transl
Med 2023; 21:765
533. Dellinger RP, Bagshaw SM, Antonelli M, et al; EUPHRATES
Trial Investigators: Effect of targeted polymyxin B hemoperfusion on 28-day mortality in patients with septic shock and
elevated endotoxin level: The EUPHRATES randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2018; 320:1455–1463
534. Chen JJ, Lai P-C, Lee T-H, et al: Blood purification for adult
patients with severe infection or sepsis/septic shock: A network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Crit Care
Med 2023; 51:1777–1789
535. Rimmer E, Houston BL, Kumar A, et al: The efficacy and
safety of plasma exchange in patients with sepsis and septic
shock: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care
2014; 18:699
536. Nakamura T, Ebihara I, Shoji H, et al: Treatment with polymyxin B-immobilized fiber reduces platelet activation in
septic shock patients: Decrease in plasma levels of soluble P-selectin, platelet factor 4 and beta-thromboglobulin.
Inflamm Res 1999; 48:171–175
537. Nakamura T, Ushiyama C, Suzuki S, et al: Polymyxin
b-immobilized fiber reduces increased plasma endothelin-1
concentrations in hemodialysis patients with sepsis. Ren Fail
2000; 22:225–234
538. Tomlinson G, Al-Khafaji A, Conrad SA, et al: Bayesian methods: A potential path forward for sepsis trials. Crit Care 2023;
27:432
539. Klein DJ, Foster D, Walker PM, et al: Polymyxin B hemoperfusion in endotoxemic septic shock patients without extreme
endotoxemia: A post hoc analysis of the EUPHRATES trial.
Intensive Care Med 2018; 44:2205–2212
540. National Heart L, et al.: Early high-dose Vitamin D(3) for critically ill, Vitamin D-deficient patients. N Engl J Med 2019;
381:2529–2540
541. Kaur M, Soni KD, Trikha A: Does vitamin D improve all-cause
mortality in critically ill adults? An updated systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Indian J
Crit Care Med 2022; 26:853–862
542. Liu S, Yao C, Xie J, et al; EXIT-SEP Investigators: Effect of
an herbal-based injection on 28-Day mortality in patients
with sepsis: The EXIT-SEP randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Intern Med 2023; 183:647–655
543. Li C, Wang P, Zhang Li, et al: Efficacy and safety of Xuebijing
injection (a Chinese patent) for sepsis: A meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. J Ethnopharmacol 2018;
224:512–521
544. Wang J, Zhu J, Guo J, et al: Could xuebijing injection reduce
the mortality of severe pneumonia patients? A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Evid Based Complement Alternat
Med 2020; 2020:9605793
545. Song Y, Yao C, Yao Y, et al: XueBiJing injection versus placebo for critically ill patients with severe community-acquired
pneumonia: A randomized controlled trial. Crit Care Med
2019; 47:e735–e743
www.ccmjournal.org     85

Prescott et al
546. Wang Y, Parpia S, Ge L, et al: Proton-pump inhibitors to prevent gastrointestinal bleeding - an updated meta-analysis.
NEJM Evid 2024; 3:EVIDoa2400134
547. Cook D, Deane A, Lauzier F, et al; REVISE Investigators:
Stress ulcer prophylaxis during Invasive mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 2024; 391:9–20
548. Granholm A, Zeng L, Dionne JC, et al; GUIDE Group:
Predictors of gastrointestinal bleeding in adult ICU patients:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med
2019; 45:1347–1359
549. Mer M, Schultz MJ, Adhikari NK; European Society of Intensive
Care Medicine (ESICM) Global Intensive Care Working Group
and the Mahidol–Oxford Research Unit (MORU), Bangkok,
Thailand: Core elements of general supportive care for patients
with sepsis and septic shock in resource-limited settings.
Intensive Care Med 2017; 43:1690–1694
550. MacLaren R, Dionne JC, Granholm A, et al: Society of Critical
Care Medicine and American Society of Health-System
Pharmacists Guideline for the Prevention of Stress-Related
Gastrointestinal Bleeding in Critically Ill Adults. Crit Care Med
2024; 52:e421–e430
551. Krag M, Marker S, Perner A, et al; SUP-ICU trial group:
Pantoprazole in patients at risk for gastrointestinal bleeding
in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2018; 379:2199–2208
552. et al.; Australian, P.I.f.t.: Effect of stress ulcer prophylaxis with
proton pump inhibitors vs histamine-2 receptor blockers on
in-hospital mortality among ICU patients receiving invasive
mechanical ventilation: The PEPTIC randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 2020; 323:616–626
553. Dickson RP: The microbiome and critical illness. Lancet
Respir Med 2016; 4:59–72
554. Haak BW, Prescott HC, Wiersinga WJ: Therapeutic potential of the gut microbiota in the prevention and treatment of
sepsis. Front Immunol 2018; 9:2042
555. Sharif S, Greer A, Skorupski C, et al: Probiotics in critical illness: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Crit Care Med 2022; 50:1175–1186
556. Johnstone J, Meade M, Lauzier F, et al; Prevention of
Severe Pneumonia and Endotracheal Colonization Trial
(PROSPECT) Investigators and the Canadian Critical Care
Trials Group: Effect of probiotics on incident ventilatorassociated pneumonia in critically ill patients: A randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 2021; 326:1024–1033
557. Acheampong A, Vincent JL: A positive fluid balance is an independent prognostic factor in patients with sepsis. Crit Care
2015; 19:251
558. Malbrain M, et al.: Principles of fluid management and stewardship in septic shock: It is time to consider the four D’s and
the four phases of fluid therapy. Ann Intensive Care 2018;
8:66
559. Finfer S, Myburgh J, Bellomo R: Intravenous fluid therapy in
critically ill adults. Nat Rev Nephrol 2018; 14:541–557
560. Ostermann M, Alshamsi F, Artigas Raventos A, et al:
European society of intensive care medicine clinical practice
guideline on fluid therapy in adult critically ill patients: Part
3-fluid removal at de-escalation phase. Intensive Care Med
2025; 51:1749–1763
561. Berthelsen RE, Perner A, Jensen AK, et al: Forced fluid removal in intensive care patients with acute kidney injury: The
86     www.ccmjournal.org

randomised FFAKI feasibility trial. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
2018; 62:936–944
562. Silversides JA, McMullan R, Emerson LM, et al: Feasibility
of conservative fluid administration and deresuscitation
compared with usual care in critical illness: The role of
active deresuscitation after resuscitation-2 (RADAR-2) randomised clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2022; 48:190–200
563. Bagshaw SM, Gibney RTN, Kruger P, et al: The effect of
low-dose furosemide in critically ill patients with early acute
kidney injury: A pilot randomized blinded controlled trial (the
SPARK study). J Crit Care 2017; 42:138–146
564. Cinotti R, Lascarrou J-B, Azais M-A, et al: Diuretics decrease
fluid balance in patients on invasive mechanical ventilation:
The randomized-controlled single blind, IRIHS study. Crit
Care 2021; 25:98
565. Vaara ST, Ostermann M, Bitker L, et al; REVERSE-AKI study
team: Restrictive fluid management versus usual care in
acute kidney injury (REVERSE-AKI): A pilot randomized controlled feasibility trial. Intensive Care Med 2021; 47:665–673
566. Cantarovich F, Rangoonwala B, Lorenz H, et al; High-Dose
Flurosemide in Acute Renal Failure Study Group: High-dose
furosemide for established ARF: A prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial. Am J
Kidney Dis 2004; 44:402–409
567. National Heart L, et al.: Comparison of two ­fluid-management
strategies in acute lung injury. N Engl J Med 2006;
354:2564–2575
568. Hamishehkar H, Sanaie S, Fattahi V, et al: The effect of furosemide on the level of neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin in critically hospitalized patients with acute kidney
injury. Indian J Crit Care Med 2017; 21:442–447
569. Mitchell JP, Schuller D, Calandrino FS, et al: Improved outcome based on fluid management in critically ill patients
requiring pulmonary artery catheterization. Am Rev Respir Dis
1992; 145:990–998
570. Mekontso Dessap A, Roche-Campo F, Kouatchet A, et al:
Natriuretic peptide-driven fluid management during ventilator weaning: A randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2012; 186:1256–1263
571. Wichmann S, Schønemann-Lund M, Perner A, et al: Goaldirected fluid removal with furosemide versus placebo in
intensive care patients with fluid overload: A randomised,
blinded trial (GODIF trial-First version). Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 2023; 67:470–478
572. Cagino LM, Walzl E, McSparron JI, et al: Goals of care
assessment during hospitalization for sepsis. Ann Am Thorac
Soc 2025; 22:1035–1041
573. Uyeda AM, Lee RY, Pollack LR, et al: Predictors of documented goals-of-care discussion for hospitalized patients
with chronic illness. J Pain Symptom Manage 2023;
65:233–241
574. Lee RY, Brumback LC, Lober WB, et al: Identifying goals
of care conversations in the electronic health record using
natural language processing and machine learning. J Pain
Symptom Manage 2021; 61:136–142.e2
575. Mahendraker N, Gutierrez-Asis E, Park S, et al: Using electronic health record mortality data to promote goals-of-care
discussions in seriously ill transferred patients: A pilot study.
ACI Open 2024; 08:e69–e78
April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

Special Article
576. Norton SA, Hogan LA, Holloway RG, et al: Proactive palliative care in the medical intensive care unit: Effects on length
of stay for selected high-risk patients. Crit Care Med 2007;
35:1530–1535
577. O’Mahony S, McHenry J, Blank AE, et al: Preliminary report
of the integration of a palliative care team into an intensive
care unit. Palliat Med 2010; 24:154–165
578. Deptola AZ, Riggs J: Inpatient goals-of-care conversations
reduce intensive care unit transfers in high-risk patients. Am
J Hosp Palliat Care 2019; 36:583–586
579. Schneiderman LJ, Gilmer T, Teetzel HD, et al: Effect of ethics consultations on nonbeneficial life-sustaining treatments
in the intensive care setting: A randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2003; 290:1166–1172
580. Ma J, Chi S, Buettner B, et al: Early palliative care consultation in the medical ICU: A cluster randomized crossover trial.
Crit Care Med 2019; 47:1707–1715
581. Curtis JR, Lee RY, Brumback LC, et al: Intervention to promote communication about goals of care for hospitalized
patients with serious illness: A randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 2023; 329:2028–2037
582. Kruser JM, Nadig NR, Viglianti EM, et al: Time-limited trials for patients with critical illness: A review of the literature.
Chest 2024; 165:881–891
583. Kruser JM, Ashana DC, Courtright KR, et al: Defining the
time-limited trial for patients with critical illness: An official
American thoracic society workshop report. Ann Am Thorac
Soc 2024; 21:187–199
584. Turnbull AE, Hartog CS: Goal-concordant care in the ICU:
A conceptual framework for future research. Intensive Care
Med 2017; 43:1847–1849
585. Kruser JM, Cox CE, Schwarze ML: Clinical momentum in the
intensive care unit. A latent contributor to unwanted care.
Ann Am Thorac Soc 2017; 14:426–431
586. Chang DW, Neville TH, Parrish J, et al: Evaluation of timelimited trials among critically ill patients with advanced medical illnesses and reduction of nonbeneficial ICU treatments.
JAMA Intern Med 2021; 181:786–794
587. Hauschildt KE: Whose good death? Valuation and standardization as mechanisms of inequality in hospitals. J Health Soc
Behav 2024; 65:221–236
588. Ashana DC, Welsh W, Preiss D, et al: Racial differences in
shared decision-making about critical illness. JAMA Intern
Med 2024; 184:424–432
589. Kram BL, Schultheis JM, Kram SJ, et al: A pharmacybased electronic handoff tool to reduce discharge prescribing of atypical antipsychotics initiated in the intensive care
unit: A quality improvement initiative. J Pharm Pract 2019;
32:434–441
590. Nulph D, et al.: Impact of a computer-assisted pharmacy transitions of care process on medication de-prescribing when
transferring from the intensive care unit. Clinical Pharmacy
Research Report 2023; 6:1203–1209
591. Walsh TS, Salisbury LG, Merriweather JL, et al; RECOVER
Investigators: Increased hospital-based physical rehabilitation and information provision after intensive care unit discharge: The RECOVER randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern
Med 2015; 175:901–910
Critical Care Medicine

592. Gilmartin M, Moran F, Segurado R, et al: Intensive care discharge facilitation using the REhabilitation after Critical
illness Assisted discharge Pack (RECAP) model: A pilot
randomized controlled trial. Physiother Pract Res 2018;
39:63–74
593. Schmidt K, Worrack S, Von Korff M, et al; SMOOTH Study
Group: Effect of a primary care management intervention on
mental health-related quality of life among survivors of sepsis:
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 315:2703–2711
594. Mikkelsen ME, Still M, Anderson BJ, et al: Society of Critical
Care Medicine’s International Consensus Conference on
Prediction and Identification of Long-Term Impairments After
Critical Illness. Crit Care Med 2020; 48:1670–1679
595. Bloom SL, Stollings JL, Kirkpatrick O, et al: Randomized clinical trial of an ICU recovery pilot program for survivors of
critical illness. Crit Care Med 2019; 47:1337–1345
596. Cuthbertson BH, Rattray J, Campbell MK, et al; PRaCTICaL
study group: The PRaCTICaL study of nurse led, intensive
care follow-up programmes for improving long term outcomes from critical illness: A pragmatic randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2009; 339:b3723
597. Daly BJ, Douglas SL, Kelley CG, et al: Trial of a disease management program to reduce hospital readmissions of the
chronically critically ill. Chest 2005; 128:507–517
598. Drewitz KP, Hasenpusch C, Bernardi C, et al: Piloting an ICU
follow-up clinic to improve health-related quality of life in
ICU survivors after a prolonged intensive care stay (PINA):
Feasibility of a pragmatic randomised controlled trial. BMC
Anesthesiol 2023; 23:344
599. Haines KJ, Hibbert E, Skinner EH, et al: In-person peer
support for critical care survivors: The ICU REcovery solutions cO-Led through surVivor Engagement (ICURESOLVE)
pilot randomised controlled trial. Aust Crit Care 2024;
37:859–865
600. Ojeda A, Calvo A, Cuñat T, et al: Effectiveness of a specific
follow up program for the management of the mental components of post-intensive care syndrome and chronic pain
after COVID-19: Results from the PAIN-COVID randomized clinical trial. Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim (Engl Ed) 2024;
71:349–359
601. Taylor SP, Murphy S, Rios A, et al: Effect of a multicomponent sepsis transition and recovery program on mortality and
readmissions after sepsis: The improving morbidity during
post-acute care transitions for sepsis randomized clinical
trial. Crit Care Med 2022; 50:469–479
602. McPeake J, Iwashyna TJ, MacTavish P, et al: Could an integrated model of health and social care after critical illness
reduce socioeconomic disparities in outcomes? A Bayesian
analysis. BJA Open 2024; 9:100259
603. Prinjha S, Field K, Rowan K: What patients think about
ICU follow-up services: A qualitative study. Crit Care 2009;
13:R46
604. McPeake J, Oakes M, Graham C, et al; James Lind Alliance
Sepsis PSP Steering Group: Top ten research priorities for
sepsis research: UK james lind alliance priority setting partnershi. Lancet Respir Med 2024; 12:e68–e69
605. Iwashyna TJ, Ely EW, Smith DM, et al: Long-term cognitive
impairment and functional disability among survivors of severe sepsis. JAMA 2010; 304:1787–1794
www.ccmjournal.org     87

Prescott et al
606. De Silva S, Urwin A, Grimwood C, et al: Health-related quality
of life of adult sepsis survivors following critical illness: A systematic review. Crit Care Explor 2025; 7:e1238
607. Hodgson CL, Higgins AM, Bailey M, et al; PREDICT Study
Investigators: Comparison of 6-month outcomes of sepsis
versus non-sepsis critically ill patients receiving mechanical
ventilation. Crit Care 2022; 26:174
608. Asimakos A, Spetsioti S, Mavronasou A, et al: Additive benefit of rehabilitation on physical status, symptoms and mental
health after hospitalisation for severe COVID-19 pneumonia.
BMJ Open Respir Res 2023; 10:e001377
609. Battle C, James K, Temblett P, et al: Supervised exercise rehabilitation in survivors of critical illness: A randomised controlled trial. J Intensive Care Soc 2019; 20:18–26
610. Capin JJ, Jolley SE, Morrow M, et al: Safety, feasibility and initial efficacy of an app-facilitated telerehabilitation (AFTER)
programme for COVID-19 survivors: A pilot randomised
study. BMJ Open 2022; 12:e061285
611. Connolly B, Thompson A, Douiri A, et al: Exercise-based rehabilitation after hospital discharge for survivors of critical
illness with intensive care unit-acquired weakness: A pilot
feasibility trial. J Crit Care 2015; 30:589–598
612. Denehy L, Skinner EH, Edbrooke L, et al: Exercise rehabilitation for patients with critical illness: A randomized
controlled trial with 12 months of follow-u. Crit Care 2013;
17:R156
613. Jackson JC, Ely EW, Morey MC, et al: Cognitive and physical
rehabilitation of intensive care unit survivors: Results of the
RETURN randomized controlled pilot investigation. Crit Care
Med 2012; 40:1088–1097
614. Longobardi I, Goessler K, de Oliveira Júnior GN, et al: Effects
of a 16-week home-based exercise training programme on
health-related quality of life, functional capacity, and persistent symptoms in survivors of severe/critical COVID19: A randomised controlled trial. Br J Sports Med 2023;
57:1295–1303
615. McDowell K, O'Neill B, Blackwood B, et al: Effectiveness of
an exercise programme on physical function in patients discharged from hospital following critical illness: A randomised
controlled trial (the REVIVE trial). Thorax 2017; 72:594–595
616. McWilliams DJ, Benington S, Atkinson D: Outpatient-based
physical rehabilitation for survivors of prolonged critical illness: A randomized controlled trial. Physiother Theory Pract
2016; 32:179–190
617. Shelly AG, Prabhu NS, Jirange P, et al: Quality of life improves
with individualized home-based exercises in critical care survivors. Indian J Crit Care Med 2017; 21:89–93
618. Vitacca M, Barbano L, Vanoglio F, et al: Does 6-month home
caregiver-supervised physiotherapy improve post-critical

88     www.ccmjournal.org

care outcomes?: A randomized controlled trial. Am J Phys
Med Rehabil 2016; 95:571–579
619. Sell S, Fleischmann-Struzek C, Spoden M, et al: Mental
health in the first year after ICU-treated sepsis: Analysis of
administrative diagnoses in German health claims data. Gen
Hosp Psychiatry 2025; 93:109–115
620. Cox CE, Gallis JA, Olsen MK, et al: Mobile app-based mindfulness intervention for addressing psychological distress
among survivors of hospitalization for COVID-19 infection.
CHEST Crit Care 2024; 2:100063
621. Cox CE, Kelleher SA, Parish A, et al: Feasibility of mobile
app-based coping skills training for cardiorespiratory failure
survivors: The blueprint pilot randomized controlled trial. Ann
Am Thorac Soc 2023; 20:861–871
622. Wade DM, Mouncey PR, Richards-Belle A, et al; POPPI Trial
Investigators: Effect of a nurse-led preventive psychological
intervention on symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder
among critically ill patients: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA
2019; 321:665–675
623. Vranceanu AM, Bannon S, Mace R, et al: Feasibility and efficacy of a resiliency intervention for the prevention of chronic
emotional distress among survivor-caregiver dyads admitted
to the neuroscience intensive care unit: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3:e2020807
624. Vlake JH, van Bommel J, Wils E-J, et al: Intensive care unitspecific virtual reality for critically ill patients with COVID-19:
Multicenter randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res
2022; 24:e32368
625. Bates A, Golding H, Rushbrook S, et al: A randomised pilot
feasibility study of eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing recent traumatic episode protocol, to improve psychological recovery following intensive care admission for
COVID-19. J Intensive Care Soc 2023; 24:309–319
626. Khan BA, Perkins AJ, Khan SH, et al: Mobile critical care
recovery program for survivors of acute respiratory failure:
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open 2024;
7:e2353158
627. Brummel NE, Girard TD, Ely EW, et al: Feasibility and safety
of early combined cognitive and physical therapy for critically
ill medical and surgical patients: The activity and cognitive
therapy in ICU (ACT-ICU) trial. Intensive Care Med 2014;
40:370–379
628. Dong Q, Yang Y, Tang Q, et al: Effects of early cognitive rehabilitation training on cognitive function and quality of life in
critically ill patients with cognitive impairment: A randomised
controlled trial. Aust Crit Care 2023; 36:708–715
629. Zhao J, Yao Li, Wang C, et al: The effects of cognitive intervention on cognitive impairments after intensive care unit
admission. Neuropsychol Rehabil 2017; 27:301–317

April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4

