April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 • Pages XX–XX
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     1DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000007075This article is simultane-
ously published in the journals 
Critical Care Medicine (10.1097/
CCM.0000000000007075) and 
Intensive Care Medicine (10.1007/
s00134-026-08361-1). All Rights 
Reserved.
Copyright © 2026 by the Society 
of Critical Care Medicineand the 
European Society of Intensive Care 
Medicine. All Rights Reserved.Hallie C. Prescott , MD, MSc1,2
Massimo Antonelli , MD3,4
Waleed Alhazzani, MD, MSc, FRCPC5,6,7
Morten Hylander Møller, MD, PhD8,9
Fayez Alshamsi, MBBS10
Luciano C. P. Azevedo, MD, PhD11
Emilie Belley-Cote, MD, PhD12,13,14
Jan De Waele, MD PhD15,16
Lennie Derde, MD, PhD17,18
Joanna C. Dionne, MD, MSc, PhD, 
FRCPC19,20
Laura Evans, MD21
Hayley B. Gershengorn, MD22,23
Carol L. Hodgson, PhD, PT, MPhils, 
PGDip(Crit Care)24,25
Kimia Honarmand, MD, MSc, PhD26,27
Jozef Kesecioglu, MD, PhD28
Lauralyn McIntyre, MD29,30
Mervyn Mer, MD, PhD31
Mark E. Nunnally, MD32
Simon J. W. Oczkowski, MD20,27
Bram Rochwerg, MD, MSc, FRCPC, 
FCCM, ATSF20,27
Olurotimi Olaolu Akinola, MBBS, 
MMED33
Kwame A. Akuamoah-Boateng, DNP, 
ACNP-BC, FCCM34
Laura Alberto, BN, Esp.Ed., MEd, 
Com.Sc.(Dip), PhD35,36
Derek C. Angus, MD37
Yaseen M. Arabi, MD38SPECIAL ARTICLE
Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International 
Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and 
Septic Shock 2026
Sepsis, life-threatening acute organ dysfunction due to infection (1), is 
a global health priority (2, 3) with approximately 49 million cases and 
13 million sepsis-related deaths each year (4–6). Beyond being acutely 
deadly, sepsis contributes to new and worsened physical, cognitive, and mental 
health problems in many survivors (7, 8). Early identification and treatment are 
critical to improving outcomes.
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) guidelines are intended to support cli-
nicians caring for adult patients with sepsis, focusing on management in the hos-
pital, the immediate prehospital setting, and the immediate post-hospital setting. 
These guidelines incorporate principles of antimicrobial stewardship through 
responsible antimicrobial use, proper diagnostic strategies, and de-escalation of 
antimicrobial therapy. The recommendations reflect evidence-based best prac-
tice, distilling a large body of research into actionable recommendations. They 
empower individuals and health systems to make informed choices about care 
and support improvements in management and outcomes of sepsis (Table 1 ).
METHODS
Details on the guidelines scope, relationship to SSC bundles, history, and 
sponsorship; committee selection, characteristics, and organization; conflicts 
of interest management; patient, intervention, comparator, outcome (PICO) 
question selection; outcomes prioritization; evidence synthesis; certainty of 
evidence assessment; recommendation formulation; consensus voting; and 
implications of strong vs. conditional recommendations are presented in 
Supplemental Digital Content 1 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904). We 
highlight key aspects of the methodology here.
The SSC guidelines were fully funded by Society of Critical Care Medicine 
(SCCM) and European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM), with meth-
odological support from the Guidelines in Intensive Care Medicine, Development, 
and Evaluation group. Sponsoring professional societies supported the partic-
ipation of their representatives. There was no industry support. The 69-person 
guidelines committee had broad geographic diversity, representing 23 countries, 
with 38% of panelists currently or previously practicing in a low- or middle-
income country (LMIC). The guidelines committee also had broad diversity of 
clinical professions and disciplines, as detailed in Supplemental Digital Content 1 
(https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904). We convened a patient and family advisory 
panel who worked with the committee throughout the guidelines development 
process to ensure incorporation of patients’ values and preferences.
The guidelines committee was organized into six subgroups based on clin-
ical domain: screening and early management; infection; hemodynamics; 
Prescott et al2     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4respiratory support; adjunctive and additional therapies; and goals of care, 
transitions of care, and long-term outcomes, as well as a usability workgroup 
that developed material to support dissemination and uptake of the guidelines. 
Each subgroup had at least one panelist currently practicing in a LMIC.
Evidence Synthesis
The process for selecting PICO questions and completing evidence synthesis 
is detailed in Supplemental Digital Content 1 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H904). Prioritized patient-centered outcomes were selected a priori for each 
question. PICO questions addressed in this guideline update are presented in 
Supplemental Digital Content 2 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H905).
Evidence synthesis followed the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) methodology. Evidence profiles for 
each PICO question are presented in Supplemental Digital Content 3 (https://
links.lww.com/CCM/H906), Supplemental Digital Content 4 (https://links.
lww.com/CCM/H907), Supplemental Digital Content 5 (https://links.lww.
com/CCM/H908), Supplemental Digital Content 6 (https://links.lww.com/
CCM/H909), Supplemental Digital Content 7 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H910), and Supplemental Digital Content 8 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H911). The certainty of evidence was graded as high, medium, low, or very low 
according to GRADE methodology. We used the Evidence to Decision (EtD) 
framework (9) to support consistent, transparent, and structured formulation 
of statements across the guideline. The EtD framework considers the balance 
of effects, the certainty of evidence, as well as patient values, resource intensity, 
equity, and cost effectiveness (9). The EtD summary of judgements for each 
PICO question is presented in Supplemental Digital Content 3 (https://links.
lww.com/CCM/H906), Supplemental Digital Content 4 (https://links.lww.
com/CCM/H907), Supplemental Digital Content 5 (https://links.lww.com/
CCM/H908), Supplemental Digital Content 6 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H909), Supplemental Digital Content 7 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H910), 
and Supplemental Digital Content 8 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H911). We 
used standardized language to summarize the findings of evidence syntheses 
based on effect size (i.e., point estimate) and certainty of the evidence, as rec-
ommended by GRADE methodology (10).
Process for Determining the Type of Statement
Figure 1 summarizes the stepwise process we used to determine the type of 
statement for each PICO question. In contrast to many other guidelines, we al-
ways provided a graded recommendation when there was at least low certainty 
evidence to inform a recommendation. For most PICO questions, we relied 
most heavily on the balance of desirable and undesirable effects to inform rec-
ommendations. However, when the balance of effects was equivalent, we relied 
on other domains in the EtD framework to determine the type of recommen-
dation and used “either/or” statements when the balance of all EtD domains 
for two different approaches or therapies were equivalent. However, for PICOs 
where the comparator was usual care alone, we used the language of “we make 
no recommendation due to equal balance of effects” since suggestions to use or Elie Azoulay, MD39
Maurizio Cecconi, MD40,41
Pauline F. Convocar, MD, MCHM42,43,44
Gennaro De Pascale, MD3,4
Kent Doi, MD, PhD45
Bin Du, MD46
Moritoki Egi, MD47
Marie-Carmelle Elie-Turenne, MD48,49
Ricard Ferrer, MD, PhD50,51
Alison Fox-Robichaud, MD52,53
Craig French, MBBS24,54
Yonathan Freund, MD, PhD55,56
Michelle Ng Gong, MD, MS57
Caleb P. Hale, MD58
Naomi E. Hammond, RN, BN, MN 
(Crit.Care), MPH, PhD59,60
Madiha Hashmi, MD, FFARCSI61
Leo Heunks, MD, PhD62
Theodore J. Iwashyna, MD, PhD63,64
Shevin T. Jacob, MD, MPH65,66
Michael Klompas, MD, MPH67,68
Arthur Kwizera, MD69
Murdoch Leeies, MD70,71
Joanna D. Lejnieks, RN72
Mitchell M. Levy, MD73
Flavia R. Machado, MD, PhD74
Marcelo O. Maia, MD75,76,77
Henry Masur, MD78
Ryan C. Maves, MD79,80
Steven McGloughlin, MD25,81
Joanne McPeake, PhD, MSc, BN 
(Hons), RGN82
Nicholas M. Mohr, MD, MS83,84 ,85
Sheila Nainan Myatra, MD86
Marlies Ostermann, MD, PhD87,88
Sandra L. Peake, MD, PhD, 
FCICM89,90,91
Mathias W. Pletz, MD92,93
Jason A. Roberts, PhD94,95,96
Regis G. Rosa, MD97,98,99
Robert G. Sawyer, MD100
Christa A. Schorr, RN, DNP101,102
Steven Q. Simpson, MD103
Li Weng, MD104
W. Joost Wiersinga, MD, PhD, 
MBA105,106,107
Andrew Rhodes, MBBS, MD108
Craig M. Coopersmith, MD109
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     3TABLE 1.
Table of Statements
  
(Continued)
Prescott et al4     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4TABLE 1, continued
 
(Continued)
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     5
 TABLE 1,  continued
(Continued)
Prescott et al6     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
 TABLE 1, continued
(Continued)
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     7
 TABLE 1, continued
(Continued)
Prescott et al8     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
 
(Continued)TABLE 1, continued
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     9
 
(Continued)TABLE 1, continued
Prescott et al10     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4not use a particular therapy were viewed as potentially 
confusing and unhelpful.
Types of Graded Recommendations
Using the GRADE approach, we classified each graded 
recommendation as either “strong” or “conditional” 
(referred to as “weak” recommendations in prior SSC 
guidelines). We used the language “we recommend” 
for strong recommendations and “we suggest” for con-
ditional recommendations, consistent with GRADE 
guidance.Implications of Graded Recommendations
A strong recommendation indicates that most, if not 
all, individuals in the relevant clinical situation should 
receive, or avoid, the intervention. In contrast, a condi-
tional recommendation acknowledges that the balance 
between desirable and undesirable may vary depend-
ing on patient values, clinical circumstances, or re-
source availability. Conditional recommendations may 
not be universally implementable and are less likely to 
be suitable for rigid performance metrics or enforce-
ment. Flexibility and local context should guide their 
 TABLE 1, continued
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     11adaptation into policy. Further details on implication 
of strong vs. conditional recommendations are pre-
sented in Table 2  and Supplemental Digital Content 1 
(https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904).
Good Practice Statements
We followed the GRADE guidance to identify state-
ments that were better classified as good practice 
statements (previously referred to as “best practice 
statements” in prior SSC guidelines (11, 12). These statements represented guidance that did not rely on 
a formal evidence profile. We used this classification 
in situations where generating high-certainty evidence 
was infeasible. To qualify as a good practice statement, 
a recommendation had to meet all of the following 
criteria: 1) it was clear and actionable, 2) it addressed 
a necessary practice, 3) the net benefit (or harm) was 
unequivocal, 4) the evidence was difficult or inappro-
priate to summarize quantitatively, 5) the rationale was 
explicit, and 6) GRADE methods were not suitable to 
formally assess certainty of evidence.
Figure 1. Process for selecting the type of statement.
TABLE 2.
Implications of Strong Vs. Conditional Recommendations
Stakeholder Strong Recommendation Conditional Recommendation
Patients and 
familiesAll or most would want the intervention. Most would want the intervention, but a 
substantial proportion would not.
Clinicians The intervention should be given to all or most patients. 
There is little need for shared decision-making for tai-
loring to context.The intervention should be done for most patients, 
but clinicians should consider shared  
decision-making, clinical context, and resources.
Policy makers Often more appropriate for policy or performance 
measure.May be less appropriate for policy or performance 
measure.
Researchers Research resources are better spent on other topics. Additional research may be warranted and may 
change future recommendations.
Prescott et al12     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4Remarks
Formal remarks were included to provide additional 
context when the statement alone could not fully cap-
ture important considerations influencing the recom-
mendation. Remarks were used to clarify or qualify 
recommendations—often in situations where the ev-
idence was weak, conflicting, or incomplete.
In Our Practice Statements
We decided a priori to include “In Our Practice” state-
ments describing the panel’s practice in areas where 
evidence was insufficient to support a formal recom-
mendation or where evidence was assessed as low or very 
low certainty and the panel determined that an “in our 
practice” statement would be helpful to end-users of the 
guideline. In our practice statements are not guidance 
or endorsement of a specific intervention. Instead, they 
document how panelists currently approach situations 
characterized by uncertainty, absence of data, or context-
specific clinical variability. The goal of these statements 
is to provide some information on current practice even 
when rigorous evidence is lacking.
Carryover Statements
We retained several statements from the 2021 SSC 
guidelines that remain clinically relevant, accurate, 
and essential to comprehensive sepsis care. These state-
ments typically addressed topics without significant 
new evidence or where further research was unlikely 
to alter prior SSC guidance. These carryover state-
ments did not undergo updated evidence synthesis, as 
they were deemed unlikely to have sufficient new ev-
idence to warrant a change in guidance based on the 
panels’ knowledge of the literature. However, the panel reviewed and voted for each carryover statement for 
continued relevance and accuracy.
Consensus Voting
We required a minimum 75% response rate and at least 
80% agreement among eligible panelists to finalize a 
recommendation (and associated formal remarks). For 
new or updated statements that did not meet the con-
sensus threshold on the first vote, we allowed two ad-
ditional rounds of voting to reach consensus. Between 
rounds, statements were refined based on panel feed-
back before revoting. Carryover statements were 
allowed just one round of voting. We achieved a greater 
than 98% response rate for each round of voting.
Sepsis Terminology
These guidelines define sepsis as life-threatening acute 
organ dysfunction due to infection, and septic shock 
as a subset of patients with circulatory dysfunction that 
confers a higher risk of mortality, consistent with the 
third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis 
and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3) (1). In clinical practice, di-
agnosis of sepsis and septic shock should be based on 
holistic clinical assessment, which may vary across set-
tings depending on local resources such as laboratory 
testing availability. The recommendations in the SSC 
guidelines are intended to be applied pragmatically to 
patients diagnosed with sepsis and septic shock accord-
ing to local practice. Furthermore, we did not restrict lit-
erature searches or evidence syntheses to studies using 
the Sepsis-3 definition, as studies using prior sepsis defi-
nitions are still informative to current practice.
Because the diagnosis of sepsis may be uncertain in 
clinical practice, we developed standardized language for 
definite, probable, possible, and unlikely sepsis, which 
are used throughout the SSC guidelines (Table 3 ).
TABLE 3.
Sepsis Terminology in This Guideline
Definite sepsis Sepsis is confirmed based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing. An alternative diagnosis 
is very unlikely. 
Probable sepsis High suspicion for sepsis. Sepsis is the most likely diagnosis based on history, clinical examination, and 
diagnostic testing. An alternative diagnosis is less likely.
Possible sepsis Moderate suspicion for sepsis. Sepsis is a possible diagnosis; however, an alternative diagnosis is also 
likely based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing.
Unlikely sepsis Low suspicion for sepsis. Clinical assessment is not consistent with sepsis, or an alternate diagnosis is 
more likely based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     13SCREENING AND EARLY MANAGEMENT
Performance Improvement Programs
1. For hospitals and health 
systems, we “recommend” 
using a performance 
improvement program for 
sepsis, including sepsis 
screening for acutely ill, 
high-risk patients; standard 
operating procedures for 
treatment; and implementation 
of sepsis quality improvement 
strategies.
(strong recommendation, 
moderate certainty evidence 
for screening)
(strong recommendation, very low 
certainty evidence for standard 
operating procedures)
(strong recommendation, 
moderate certainty evidence for 
quality improvement strategies)
Remark: Performance 
improvement programs and 
quality improvement strategies 
may vary by setting and in 
accordance with a hospital/
healthcare system’s ability to 
implement. New (sepsis quality 
improvement); 
Carried over 
(performance 
improvement program 
with screening and 
standard operating 
procedures). 
The recommendations for sepsis screening and 
standard operating procedures were carried over, so 
did not undergo formal updated evidence synthesis. 
However, several relevant randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) have been published since the 2021 SSC guide-
lines, further supporting these recommendations. 
One RCT with 872 patients evaluated hour-1 bundle 
implementation in the emergency department and 
showed this standard operating procedure was asso-
ciated with shorter time to antibiotics (73 min sooner; 
95% CI, 93–53 min sooner) and an uncertain effect on 
mortality with a point estimate suggesting a possible 
large decrease (adjusted risk ratio [aRR] 0.81; 95% CI, 
0.48–1.39) (13). Second, in the large stepped-wedge, 
cluster RCT SCREEN evaluating 60,055 patients, im-
plementation of an electronic alert system, staff edu-
cation, and feedback was associated with lower 90-day 
in-hospital mortality in patients with and without 
sepsis (aRR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.77–0.93) (14).
The recommendation for using quality improvement 
(QI) strategies was newly added. QI is a systematic and ongoing effort to improve evidence-based care pro-
cesses, such as timely antibiotic administration, with 
the aim of improving clinical outcomes. QI strate-
gies represent a potentially scalable intervention for 
improving systems performance and patient care. In a 
meta-analysis of 50 observational studies, sepsis QI ini-
tiatives were associated with improved delivery of rec-
ommended care practices and reduced mortality (odds 
ratio [OR] 0.66; 95% CI, 0.61–0.72) (15). Furthermore, 
multiple before-and-after and differences-in- 
differences studies have shown improvements in both 
processes of care and clinical outcomes in hospitals 
participating in multi-hospital sepsis QI initiatives 
(16–18). Although most studies evaluating the impact 
of QI initiatives are observational, we identified one re-
cent RCT testing a QI intervention involving the dis-
play of a sepsis early warning system-triggered flag in 
the electronic health record combined with electronic 
health record-based emergency department pharma-
cist notification (19). Patients randomized to this QI 
intervention had shorter time to antimicrobial therapy 
(2.3 vs. 3.0 hr, p = 0.04) and increased days alive and 
out of hospital at 28 days (median, 24.1 vs. 22.5 d, p = 
0.01) (19).
The panel considered the balance of effects, costs, 
and feasibility, and judged that the desirable effects 
of QI interventions to probably outweigh undesirable 
effects in most settings. Our recommendation for using 
a performance improvement program for sepsis incor -
porating screening, standard operating procedures, 
and QI strategies is consistent with the U.S. Centers’ 
for Disease Control and Prevention’s Hospital Sepsis 
Program Core Elements guidance (20, 21). The Core 
Elements summarize key features of effective hospital 
or health system performance improvement programs 
for sepsis (20, 21). Recent surveys suggest opportuni-
ties for improvement in hospital sepsis programs, to 
support delivery of evidence-based management (22–
24). Most studies were conducted in high resource set-
tings, but QI initiatives—particularly those focused 
on sepsis bundle element adherence and data feed-
back—may be applicable in resource-limited settings 
with appropriate contextual adaptation. However, it is 
important to start with an understanding of the system 
and the particular constraints that limit the quality of 
sepsis care. Furthermore, future research should clarify 
which QI elements drive observed effects and how best 
to sustain improvements.
Prescott et al14     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4In conclusion, QI initiatives likely improve sepsis 
processes of care and may have small effects on mor -
tality. They are recommended as part of a systems-
based approach to improving sepsis management. 
Further, the integration of a performance improve-
ment program for sepsis, including screening of high-
risk patients and standardized treatment protocols, 
within existing antibiotic stewardship programs can 
enhance overall patient outcomes and optimize anti-
microbial use (25).
Implementation Strategies
2.  For hospitals and health systems, we “suggest” 
using a “code sepsis” or “sepsis huddle” protocol 
over not using such a protocol.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: “Code sepsis” or “sepsis huddle” protocols 
involve a multidisciplinary team huddle at bedside 
to discuss and expedite sepsis diagnosis and 
treatment following a positive sepsis screen. New 
“Code sepsis” is a multidisciplinary-driven process of 
care that aims to expedite the diagnosis and treatment 
of sepsis. While code sepsis protocols vary, common 
elements include a screening tool for tracking clinical 
indicators of sepsis, a trigger mechanism for alert activa-
tion for suspected sepsis by either a bedside clinician or 
an automated algorithm, and a response team that will 
provide immediate bedside evaluation and treatment 
(26–29). Composition of the response teams varies 
widely. For example, the response team may be a ded-
icated multidisciplinary sepsis response team, a general 
rapid response team with expertise in sepsis, or an ad 
hoc team of individuals already involved in the patient’s 
care (e.g., nurse, physician, pharmacist, unit manager). 
Likewise, the process of screening for sepsis and acti-
vating a code sepsis response varies, and may involve 
manual screening, automating screening, or proactive 
rounding. Finally, the implementation of sepsis evalu-
ation and treatment varies and may include fast-track 
protocols, algorithms, or checklists. As with rapid re-
sponse systems, code sepsis implementation requires an 
institutional commitment and designated leadership to 
oversee its performance and effectiveness (26).
Multiple interventional and observational studies 
with global representation investigating “code sepsis” 
were identified with mixed results in qualitative re-
view. Several studies reported improved processes and outcome of care with the intervention, including lower 
mortality (26–28, 30–34), reduced odds of mechan-
ical ventilation (26, 28), shorter time to administra-
tion of antibiotics (29, 32, 35–42) and fluids (37, 40, 
42–44), lower proportion of patients receiving vaso-
pressors (43), and earlier escalation of care (33, 37, 45). 
Furthermore, in a large stepped-wedge, cluster ran-
domized trial evaluating 60,055 patients, implementa-
tion of an electronic alert system, staff education, and 
feedback was associated with lower 90-day in-hospital 
mortality in patients with and without sepsis (aRR 
0.85; 95% CI, 0.77–0.93) (14). Meanwhile, some stud-
ies showed no difference in time to sepsis recognition 
(41, 46), administration of antibiotics (19, 31, 43–45, 
47, 48), fluid resuscitation (41), escalation of care (19, 
27, 42, 48, 49), use of vasopressors (26), and mortality 
(19, 29, 36–39, 42, 43, 48, 49).
Overall, the panel assessed that the balance of evi-
dence favored implementation of a multidisciplinary 
“code sepsis” response to improve outcomes in patients 
with sepsis. The benefit also extends to patients not 
found to have sepsis by mitigating morbidity and 
mortality through early identification of patients at 
risk for clinical deterioration and worse outcomes. 
Implementing a “code sepsis” protocol may be possible 
in most settings, by leveraging existing staff and ex-
isting rapid response systems. A recent study on sepsis 
management in 66 hospitals in 24 LMICs identified 
nearly one-third (28%) used an ICU outreach service 
(50), which could potentially be used for a code sepsis 
response team. Therefore, the panel issued a condi-
tional recommendation for the use of a multidiscipli-
nary “code sepsis” response for sepsis care. The benefit 
of implementing a code sepsis protocol likely varies 
across hospitals and health systems depending on the 
quality of usual care; it may provide more benefit in 
settings with less robust infrastructure for sepsis rec-
ognition and treatment, but relatively less incremental 
benefit in settings that already have robust systems in 
place to rapidly identify and treat sepsis.
Screening for Sepsis En Route to Hospital
3. In acutely ill adults en route to hospital by 
ambulance or flight, we “suggest” using a 
standard sepsis screening tool over not using a 
screening tool.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) New 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     15Sepsis treatment is time-sensitive, and for the one-
half of sepsis patients transported to hospitals by 
ambulance, the prehospital period is opportune to 
identify sepsis and initiate hospital notification and 
treatment (51–53). Using prehospital sepsis screen-
ing tools to identify patients at high risk for sepsis 
and sepsis-related death could shorten time to treat-
ment and improve clinical outcomes. Prehospital 
notification has improved timeliness of care in other 
acute care conditions, and diagnostic momentum 
initiated through ambulance screening and prear -
rival notification can improve sepsis performance 
(54, 55).
In a scoping review and a separate systematic review 
of prehospital sepsis screening tools, all had moderate 
ability to identify patients with sepsis in the prehos-
pital environment (56–58). In a comparative study of 
221,429 prehospital medical records that calculated 
the following early warning scores: National Early 
Warning Score (NEWS), National Early Warning 
Score 2 (NEWS2), Modified Early Warning Score 
(MEWS), systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
(SIRS), and quick sepsis-related organ failure assess-
ment (qSOFA), NEWS2 had the best absolute test per -
formance (sensitivity 73.1%; 95% CI, 71.8–74.4%; area 
under receiver operating curve [AUC] 0.77; 95% CI, 
0.71–0.83) of studied screening tools. However, due 
to the lower specificity (81.6%, 95% CI, 80.4–82.7%), 
high rate of false-positive screens (positive predic-
tive value 6.5%, 95% CI, 5.8–7.3%), and perceived 
difficulty of use in the prehospital environment, the 
panel refrained from recommending a specific screen-
ing tool (59). qSOFA score had the lowest prehospital 
sepsis sensitivity (23.1%, 95% CI, 21.8–24.3%) (59). 
These findings largely align with the test characteristics 
of these tools in the emergency department, suggesting 
that standardized screening can improve early sepsis 
recognition (60).
Several single-center studies evaluated the impact 
of implementing prehospital sepsis notification on 
process and clinical outcomes. Three of these studies 
showed that time-to-treatment on sepsis quality meas-
ures or time-to-antibiotics were shorter with prehos-
pital sepsis notification, but only one study reported a 
reduction in sepsis mortality (44, 61–63).
Based on available evidence, the panel determined 
that the balance of effects probably favors prehos-
pital ambulance-based sepsis screening for identifying patients with sepsis and improving the timeliness of 
sepsis care. Screening is likely most effective when it is 
combined with standard hospital prenotification path-
ways and emergency department-based procedures 
to facilitate rapid evaluation, risk stratification, and 
treatment.
The use of a prehospital screening tool is likely 
feasible and adaptable in all geographic settings and 
should be a research priority in low resource settings.
Screening for Sepsis in Hospital
4. For acutely ill patients in hospital, we 
“recommend” using NEWS, NEW2, MEWS, 
or SIRS over qSOFA as a single tool to 
screen for sepsis.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
The Third International Consensus Conference on the 
Definitions of Sepsis (Sepsis-3) identified qSOFA as a 
predictor of death or prolonged ICU stay in patients 
with known or suspected infection, but no analysis 
had been performed at that time to support its use 
as a screening tool (1, 64). The 2021 SSC Guidelines 
recommended against qSOFA as a sole sepsis screen-
ing tool (65, 66). Since then, numerous studies have 
investigated its use as a screening tool, with consistent 
findings (67–69). Four systematic reviews and meta-
analyses have reported that Early Warning Scores 
(EWS), including NEWS, NEWS2, MEWS, and SIRS 
were more sensitive for the diagnosis of sepsis than 
qSOFA (70–73). Similar findings have been reported 
in an LMIC (74).
There is no ideal tool to screen for sepsis that has both 
high sensitivity and specificity. Screening tools should 
have high sensitivity to limit the number of false nega-
tive results. A large cohort study of over 221,000 patients 
demonstrated NEWS2 had the greatest sensitivity and 
specificity compared with MEWS, SIRS, and qSOFA 
(59). EWS were designed to identify patients at risk of 
clinical deterioration from a variety of causes, and as 
such, they perform well in assisting with the identifi-
cation of sepsis. Bedside clinicians need to understand 
the limitations of each tool. The presence of a positive 
qSOFA should alert clinicians to the possibility of sepsis 
in all resource settings but given qSOFA ’s poor sensitivity 
for the diagnosis of sepsis, the panel issued a strong rec-
ommendation in favor of using NEWS, NEW2, MEWS, 
Prescott et al16     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4or SIRS over qSOFA as a single screening tool. However, 
a recently published stepped wedge trial showed that 
electronic qSOFA screening with activation of an alert 
system triggering subsequent nurse and physician assess-
ment and interventions resulted in improved 90-day 
in-hospital mortality (14). This benefit extended to non-
septic patients as well (14). This shows that qSOFA, while 
having a lower sensitivity for sepsis that other tools, is 
still useful for detecting clinical deterioration.
The use of artificial intelligence (AI) is receiving increas-
ing attention as a tool for early screening and prediction of 
sepsis (75, 76). Future research may inform practice in this 
area and should involve comparative studies.
Biomarkers and Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Sepsis
5. Sepsis is a clinical diagnosis and should not be 
ruled in or ruled out using a single biomarker or 
diagnostic test.
(good practice statement) New 
6. There is “insufficient evidence” to make a 
recommendation regarding use of novel rapid 
host response diagnostics.New
Several novel host response diagnostic tests are approved 
by regulatory bodies and available as diagnostic aids for 
sepsis. Sepsis can be straightforward to diagnose when in-
fection is obvious and organ dysfunction is clearly related; 
however, diagnosis can be difficult when infection is un-
confirmed and there may be alternative causes for acute 
organ dysfunction. Newer sepsis diagnostic tests aim to 
categorize patients with suspected sepsis into risk catego-
ries, for example, low, medium, and high.
Sepsis diagnostic tests use several approaches to 
assess the likelihood of sepsis. Some tests use WBC 
characteristics, for example, monocyte distribution 
width (MDW) and IntelliSep, which evaluate size 
characteristics of circulating monocytes and deform-
ability of neutrophils, respectively (77–80). SeptiCyte 
Rapid and TriVerity assess messenger RNA transcripts 
that are associated with infection and sepsis (81, 82). 
TriVerity also seeks to distinguish viral vs. bacterial in-
fection (82). Sepsis ImmunoScore uses AI to combine 
electronic health record data with specific biomarker 
and cytokine measurements (83). Additional tests 
assess individual serum biomarkers such as pancreatic 
stone protein to assess risk of sepsis (84).
None of these novel host response diagnostics pro-
vides a “positive” or “negative” result. Instead, they cate-
gorize the post-test risk of sepsis into categories, ranging from low risk to very high risk. However, the post-test 
likelihood ratios for sepsis associated with those cat-
egories are not uniform from one test to another, and 
clinicians should familiarize themselves with an indi-
vidual test’s characteristics before using it. None of the 
tests should be considered definitive; all should be used 
in combination with a full clinical evaluation. Except for 
MDW , clinicians must suspect sepsis before ordering 
the test. MDW , once activated on the appropriate he-
matological analyzer, is available for all complete blood 
counts with leukocyte differential. Thus, increased 
MDW values could prompt the re-evaluation of patients 
with non-classical presenting features, specifically to re-
assess for sepsis. Finally, in patients with clear sepsis at 
presentation, for example, those with greater than 90% 
probability of sepsis after initial evaluation, the tests add 
little diagnostic or confirmatory value.
Each of these novel host response diagnostics is 
designed to help clinicians to assess a patient’s likeli-
hood of having or developing sepsis with potentially 
greater accuracy than standard clinical evaluation, es-
pecially for patients with non-classic presentations. 
Improved diagnostic accuracy may result in better pa-
tient outcomes; however, no studies have assessed the 
clinical outcomes of a diagnostic strategy incorporat-
ing these tests. Due to the costs of these diagnostic aids, 
and lack of evidence that they improve patient-centered 
outcomes or resource utilization, the panel did not rec-
ommend the use of any specific sepsis diagnostic aids. 
Studies evaluating the impact of diagnostic aids on pa-
tient outcomes and resource utilization are a research 
priority. Thus, it is reasonable for health systems and 
clinicians make use of these novel host response diag-
nostics when feasible, whereas studying their impact 
on patient outcomes and resource utilization.
Most of these novel host response biomarkers are 
not yet available in resource limited settings (85, 86).
Blood Cultures
7 . For adults with possible, probable, or definite 
sepsis or septic shock, we “recommend” 
collecting blood cultures as soon as possible and 
ideally before the administration of antimicrobial 
therapy.
(strong recommendation, low certainty evidence) New 
Identifying the causative organism in sepsis helps to op-
timize antimicrobial therapy, ensure that the causative 
pathogen is treated, support antimicrobial stewardship, 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     17and improve patient outcomes. A pathogen is identi-
fied in approximately 60–70% of patients with sepsis, 
although blood cultures are positive in only approxi-
mately 10–20% of patients (87). There is limited direct 
evidence evaluating the clinical benefit of blood culture 
testing. However, given the high mortality and mor -
bidity associated with sepsis and the importance of 
appropriate antimicrobial coverage, the panel issued 
a strong recommendation for collection of blood cul-
tures. Blood cultures should be collected as soon as pos-
sible to avoid delay in initiating antimicrobial therapy.
Several factors affect the yield of blood cultures, in-
cluding the pretest probability of bacteremia, number 
of sets collected, the blood volume collected, the use 
of anaerobic bottles, and prior antibiotic use (88, 89). 
The panel examined multiple guidelines and a recent 
scoping review stratifying the probability of bacte-
remia based on presenting illness, with septic shock 
having a greater than or equal to 50% yield (90–94). 
Blood cultures are generally obtained from two differ -
ent sites (91), using 10-mL blood volume per tube (95). 
Multi-site collection is often recommended based on 
a) the ability to distinguish pathogens from contami-
nants when using different venipunctures sites and b) 
potential increased sensitivity for pathogen detection 
with two sets of cultures (e.g., one study showed sensi-
tivity for detecting bacteremia increased from 91.5% to 
99.3% when two sets of blood cultures were collected 
vs. one [89, 96]). However, 2025 German National 
Guidelines (93) recommend collecting blood cultures 
from a single site based on a 2025 systematic review 
of seven studies (18,901 patients, 24,955 blood culture 
samples) that showed single site cultures may result 
in a higher proportion of cultures having the recom-
mended 10 mL, improved pathogen detection, less 
contamination, and require less venipuncture (89).
The number of blood cultures and the use of anaer -
obic bottles should be individualized, especially in low 
resource settings. A small percentage (approximately 
15% of blood cultures with positive growth) show 
growth in only anaerobic bottles (97, 98). In most cases, 
however, this result does not require a change from em-
piric antibiotic therapy, as true anaerobic bloodstream 
infections usually occur in clinical situations where em-
piric treatment already includes anaerobic coverage (92, 
99, 100). Thus, the use of aerobic bottles alone can be 
justified since anaerobic cultures may not confer sub-
stantial additional benefit unless anaerobic pathogens are highly suspected. In low resource settings, collection 
of a single set of blood cultures can be justified based 
on the 2025 systematic review showing similar yield be-
tween single vs. multiple blood culture sets (89).
Attention to the technical aspects of blood culture 
collection is important to limit contamination, un-
necessary diagnostic and therapeutic interventions, 
and additional costs. Clinicians should be aware that 
administration of antimicrobial therapy before blood 
culture collection may reduce their yield. In a multi-
center study of 325 patients presenting to the emer -
gency department with sepsis-induced hypotension or 
hypoperfusion (systolic blood pressure [SBP] < 90 mm 
Hg or lactate ≥ 4 mmol/L), blood culture positivity 
decreased from 31.4% pre-antimicrobial to 19.4% 
at a median 70 minutes (interquartile range [IQR], 
50–110 min) post-antimicrobial, a 12.0% absolute re-
duction and 38.2% relative reduction in blood culture 
sensitivity (101). Wherever possible, blood cultures 
should be collected before administration of antimi-
crobial, but should not delay the initiation antimicro-
bial therapy, particularly in patients with hypotension.
Repeat cultures are recommended to confirm clear -
ance of bacteremia or fungemia for Staphylococcus au -
reus, Staphylococcus lugdunensis, and Candida  species 
(92, 102, 103).
Although the PICO question focused specifically 
on blood cultures, additional cultures to elucidate the 
source of infection should be considered (e.g., perito-
neal fluid culture) depending on the suspected site of 
infection.
Blood Lactate Measurement
8. For adults with possible, probable, or 
definite sepsis or septic shock, we “suggest” 
measuring blood lactate.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
This statement on performance was carried over, please 
see the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Initial Fluid Resuscitation
9. Sepsis and septic shock are medical 
emergencies; treatment and resuscitation 
should begin immediately.
(good practice statement) Carryover 
Prescott et al18     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 410.  For adults with sepsis-induced 
hypoperfusion or septic shock, we 
“suggest” administering at least 30 mL/kg of 
IV crystalloid in the first 3 hr.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Consideration should be given to 
individual patient characteristics and context 
when selecting initial fluid volume.
Remark: Clinicians prescribing fluids should 
perform frequent, ongoing reassessment and 
closely monitor patients to avoid harms of 
under- or over-resuscitation. 
Remark: Weight-based fluid volume should 
be calculated based on actual body weight, 
or by adjusted or ideal body weight in 
patients with body mass index > 30 kg/m2 
(Table 4).Revisited
Timely, effective fluid resuscitation is crucial for the 
stabilization of sepsis-induced tissue hypoperfu-
sion in sepsis and septic shock. As recommended in 
previous SSC guidelines, resuscitation should begin 
immediately upon recognition of sepsis or septic 
shock, and clinicians should have a low threshold 
for commencing resuscitation in patients with pos-
sible sepsis (65, 66, 104, 105). Although evidence 
in support of 30 mL/kg stems from observational 
studies and include studies evaluating 30 mL/kg as 
part of a bundle of care practices, there are no new 
data suggesting a change is needed from prior SSC 
guidelines.
Consistent with 2016 and 2021 SSC guidelines, we 
suggest administering at least 30 mL/kg of IV crys-
talloids for initial fluid resuscitation in patients with 
sepsis-induced hypoperfusion or septic shock (65, 66, 
104, 105). Sepsis-induced hypoperfusion may be iden-
tified be hypotension (e.g., MAP < 65 mm Hg, SBP < 
90 mm Hg, relative hypotension (e.g., SBP markedly 
below known baseline), or elevated lactate. Although 
lactate greater than or equal to 4 mmol/L has histor -
ically been the threshold for fluid-resuscitation, in-
termediate lactate elevation (> 2 to < 4 mmol/L) is 
common in patients with sepsis; (106) associated with 
increased mortality; (106, 107) consistent with lactate 
threshold for the Sepsis-3 definitions of septic shock 
(> 2 mmol/L); (1, 107) and may also benefit from 
fluid-resuscitation to avoid progression to overt hypo-
perfusion or shock (108). Clinicians should thus con-
sider fluid-resuscitation in patients presenting with intermediate lactate elevation, particularly if there are 
no contraindications to fluid administration.
The fixed volume of 30 mL/kg is based on observa-
tional evidence (16–18, 108), with most studies using 
actual body weight. There are no prospective interven-
tional studies comparing different volumes for initial 
resuscitation in sepsis or septic shock. A retrospective 
analysis of adults presenting to an emergency depart-
ment with sepsis or septic shock showed that failure 
to receive 30 mL/kg of crystalloid fluid therapy within 
3 hours of sepsis onset was associated with increased 
odds of in-hospital mortality, delayed resolution of 
hypotension, and increased ICU length of stay (LOS), 
including in patients with end-stage kidney disease 
and heart failure (109). An observational study of 
612 hospitals in the United States demonstrated a 
reduced risk of in-hospital mortality for patients with 
sepsis who received moderate volume fluid resuscita-
tion (4.0 L; IQR, 2.4–5.1 L) compared with very low 
volume resuscitation (1.6 L; IQR, 1.0–2.5 L) or very 
high volume resuscitation (6.1 L; IQR, 4.0–9.0 L) p  < 
0.01 (110). In the ARISE (111), ProCESS (112), and 
PROMISE (113) trials, the average volume of fluid 
received pre-randomization was also in the range of 
30 mL/kg, suggesting that this fluid volume has been 
adopted in routine clinical practice (114). A recent 
systematic review and meta-analysis addressing the 
effect of early fluid resuscitation on mortality in sepsis 
reported that a survival benefit was observed when 
30 mL/kg was completed within 3 hours (low cer -
tainty) (115).
Due to potential concerns of administering very 
large volumes of crystalloid fluid in obese patients, the 
panel determined that fluid volumes may be calculated 
using adjusted or ideal body weight in patients with 
high body mass index (116–118). In low resource set-
tings where the availability of respiratory support may 
be limited, the risks of fluid overload are more pro-
nounced, so the clinical context should be considered 
when ordering fluid resuscitation (119, 120). However, 
prior trials suggesting harm from fluid resuscitation in 
low resource settings have generally used volumes far 
exceeding 30 mL/kg. For example, in the SSSP-2 trial, 
patients randomized to the resuscitation protocol re-
ceived a median 3.5 L fluid in the first 6 hours (≥ 70 mL/
kg based on weigh inferred from arm circumference) 
vs. 2.0L (~50 mL/kg) in the usual care arm (121). It is 
important that fluid resuscitation be tailored to actual 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     19body weight in cachectic or underweight patients to 
avoid over-resuscitation (122). The panel emphasized 
the need for clinical reassessment during and follow-
ing initial fluid resuscitation to reduce the risk of either 
under or over-resuscitation.
Table 4 displays 30 mL/kg in liters for patients of 
varying heights and weights.
The SSC guidelines’ conditional recommendation to 
administer greater than or equal to 30 mL/kg of initial 
resuscitation differs from the ESCIM clinical practice 
guidelines which “suggest administering up to 30 mL/
kg of IV crystalloids in the initial phase” (123). The 
SSC panel acknowledges that fluid volume require-
ments vary across patients and encourages frequent 
reassessment to avoid under- or over-resuscitation. 
However, most patients with sepsis-induced hypoten-
sion and hypoperfusion benefit from greater than or 
equal to 30 mL/kg fluid resuscitation and fluid-related 
harms generally occur with far larger volumes (e.g., > 
50 mL/kg).Timing of Vasopressor Initiation Relative to 
Fluid Resuscitation
11.  For adults with sepsis-induced hypotension, 
we “suggest” initial IV crystalloid fluid bolus 
resuscitation followed by vasopressor support if 
hypotension persists.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: In patients with unstable septic shock, 
immediate concurrent administration of 
vasopressors together with IV crystalloid fluid may 
be warranted on a case-by-case basis. Presence 
of unstable shock should be determined by 
physical examination. Suggestive clinical features 
of unstable shock include severely reduced 
blood pressure, mottled skin, ashen appearance, 
cyanosis/decreased oxygen saturation, 
tachycardia, and altered mentation. New 
Sepsis-induced hypotension is a critical condition 
that requires prompt and appropriate intervention to 
restore perfusion and the mitigate risk of end-organ 
damage. The timing of vasopressor initiation—either 
immediately, concomitantly with, or after fluid resus-
citation—remains a topic of debate. The rationale for 
earlier vasopressor initiation in septic shock includes 
faster restoration of blood pressure and prevention of 
fluid overload (124, 125). Persistent hypotension is as-
sociated with worse outcomes in observational studies 
(126).
Recent studies provide mixed evidence on the tim-
ing of vasopressor administration in sepsis-induced 
hypotension. Four relevant systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses were identified (124, 127–129). Two 
small, single-center RCTs suggest that early admin-
istration of fixed, low-dose norepinephrine is asso-
ciated with reduced fluid requirements and lower 
short-term mortality (125, 130). However, these 
trials were limited by a prolonged time to shock 
resolution, several hours in both arms (125, 130). 
Nonetheless, the findings of these trials were sim-
ilar to observational studies suggesting that early 
vasopressor use may be associated with lower mor -
tality (131, 132). The multicenter CLOVERS RCT, 
however, found no difference in 90-day mortality, 
organ support-free days, or receipt of invasive ven-
tilation between resuscitation algorithms with early 
vs. delayed vasopressor initiation (133). Recent ob-
servational studies have indicated that peripheral 
administration of vasopressors is both feasible and TABLE 4.
30 mL/kg in Liters, by Weight and Height
Height (m) (feet, inches)
Weigh (kg) 
(lb.) 1.5 m (4′11″) 1.7 m (5′7″) 1.9 m (6′3″)
50 (110) 1.5 1.5 1.5
60 (132) 1.8 1.8 1.8
70 (154) 2.1 2.1 2.1
80 (176) 1.9 2.4 2.4
90 (200) 2.0 2.4 2.7
100 (220) 2.1 2.5 3.0
110 (242) 2.2 2.6 3.3
120 (264) 2.3 2.7 3.0
130 (287) 2.5 2.8 3.1
140 (309) 2.6 3.0 3.2
150 (331) 2.7 3.1 3.3
160 (353) 2.8 3.2 3.4
White cells, for patients with body mass index (BMI) ≤ 30 kg/m2 
display 30 mL/kg using actual body weight. Italicized values, for 
patients with BMI > 30 kg/m2 display 30 mL/kg using adjusted 
body weight. Adjusted Body Weight was calculated as Ideal Body 
Weight + 0.4*(Actual Body Weight—Adjusted Body Weight), 
where Ideal Body Weight was calculated using the Devine formula 
(122a) for males.
Prescott et al20     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4safe (134, 135), so early vasopressor administration 
is adaptable to all settings.
The panel based its recommendations on a careful 
review of available evidence, balancing the potential 
benefits of early vasopressor administration in patients 
with life-threatening end-organ hypoperfusion against 
the lack of clear evidence supporting its use in all 
patients, as well as the potential harms of unnecessary 
catecholamine exposure in patients whose hypoten-
sion could be rapidly corrected with fluid resuscitation.
It is important to note that studies often exclude 
patients with severe comorbidities or in critical states, 
which may limit the generalizability of available evi-
dence. Furthermore, most studies did not account for 
local variations in sepsis care practices, which may 
affect outcomes.
Further multicenter RCTs with larger sample sizes 
are needed to confirm the optimal timing for vaso-
pressor initiation in sepsis-induced hypotension. There 
are currently 5 geographically diverse RCTs underway, 
the results of which are likely to provide further evi-
dence on the subject: NCT05179499, NCT04569942, 
NCT06709573, NCT05836272, NCT05931601.
Route of Vasopressor Administration
12.  In adults with septic shock, we “suggest” 
starting vasopressors peripherally to restore 
mean arterial pressure rather than delaying 
initiation until central venous access is 
secured.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Data are insufficient to recommend a 
duration of use, dose, or access route (size 
of peripheral IV line or anatomic location). 
Midline catheters were not considered. Revisited 
Traditionally, vasopressors were administered exclu-
sively through central venous catheters out of concern 
for tissue necrosis associated with extravasation from 
peripheral IV lines (136). Recent data suggest that 
clinicians (137) and hospital policies (138) are more 
comfortable with peripheral vasopressor administra-
tion than with delayed initiation of vasopressors if no 
central access is present.
The panel considered one RCT (139) of 263 general 
ICU patients (of whom 70% required vasopressors) 
randomized to immediate central venous catheter 
placement vs. no catheter placement, which found an uncertain effect on mortality (hazard ratio [HR] 1.30; 
95% CI, 0.84–2.01, very low certainty evidence). We 
also considered observational studies which, when 
evaluated via meta-analysis, found an uncertain effect 
on mortality with peripheral vasopressor administra-
tion (two studies [139, 140] with 611 patients, 28-day 
mortality aRR: 0.85; 95% CI, 0.63–1.14; 3 studies [141–
143] with 1,868 patients, 90-day mortality aRR: 0.89; 
95% CI, 0.73–1.08; both very low certainty). Across 
seven studies (139, 141–146) (1657 patients), the 
pooled complication rate for peripheral vasopressor 
administration was 5.97% (95% CI 1.17–14.09%, very 
low certainty).
The panel determined that balance of effects and 
resource use probably favors initial peripheral vaso-
pressor administration; however, evidence certainty 
was very low. Thus, we suggest starting vasopressors 
peripherally to restore arterial blood pressure rather 
than delaying initiation until central venous access 
is secured, in line with the 2021 SSC guidelines (65, 
66). Existing studies demonstrating safety of periph-
eral vasopressor administration generally occurred in 
the setting of a safety protocol to ensure the peripheral 
IV was high quality, monitor frequently for extrava-
sation, and treat extravasation when present, but the 
specific details of safety protocols vary (147). In low 
resource settings where frequent monitoring for ade-
quacy of peripheral IVs and presence of extravasation 
is not feasible, peripheral vasopressors should be used 
with caution.
Future studies are needed to inform the optimal 
safety protocols for using peripheral vasopressors, in-
cluding the safe duration of peripheral vasopressor use, 
specific vasopressor medications and maximal doses, 
peripheral IV access size, and peripheral IV anatomic 
location. Further, understanding the efficacy and safety 
of midline catheters (148) to administer vasopressors 
in adult septic shock is a research priority.
“In our practice, ” 86.6% of panel members use pe-
ripheral vasopressors on at least some occasions. Of 
these panel members, 12.1% do so only until central 
access can be placed. Nearly one-half (46.6%) use pe-
ripheral vasopressors for up to 6 hours, 13.8% use them 
for up to 24 hours, and 27.6% do not have a set duration 
for use. Vasopressor dose (79.3% of panel members), 
peripheral access site (70.7%), and specific vasopressor 
(48.3%) are common factors influencing panel mem-
bers’ decision to switch to central access; some panel 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     21members also consider clinical trajectory, number of 
vasopressors, additional indications for central access, 
and availability of central access supplies when de-
ciding to transition to central administration.
Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP) Targets
13.  For adults with septic shock, we 
“recommend” an initial MAP target of 65 mm 
Hg over higher MAP targets.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty 
evidence)
Remark: In practice, it is not feasible to maintain 
MAP at exactly 65 mm Hg, so a reasonable 
range (e.g., within 5 mm Hg) should be used. 
Vasopressors should be titrated to maintain 
MAP within this range. Carryover 
with 
new 
remark 
14.  For adults with septic shock 65 years old or 
older, we “suggest” an initial MAP range of 
60–65 mm Hg over higher ranges.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)New
Mean arterial pressure (MAP) is a key determinant 
of mean systemic filling pressure, which in turn is a 
major driver of venous return and cardiac output. 
Increasing MAP therefore usually results in increased 
blood flow and augments the supply side of tissue per -
fusion. Although some organs, such as the brain and 
kidneys can auto-regulate blood flow, MAPs below 
a threshold, often understood to be approximately 
60 mm Hg, are associated with decreased organ per -
fusion, which tracks linearly with MAP (149, 150). 
The 2021 SSC guidelines recommended targeting 
an MAP of 65 mm Hg or higher for initial resuscita-
tion (65, 66). The recommendation was based princi-
pally on an RCT in septic shock comparing patients 
who were prescribed vasopressors to target a MAP of 
65–70 mm Hg, vs a target of 80–85 mm Hg (151). This 
trial found no difference in mortality between arms, 
although a subgroup analysis demonstrated a 10.5% 
absolute reduction in renal replacement therapy (RRT) 
with higher MAP targets among patients with chronic 
hypertension. However, targeting a higher MAP with 
vasopressors was associated with a higher risk of atrial 
fibrillation. A limitation of this trial was that the av-
erage MAP in both arms exceeded the targeted range.
A meta-analysis of two RCTs indicated that higher 
MAP targets may result in little to no difference 
in short-term mortality in septic shock (RR, 1.05; 
95% CI, 0.90–1.23, low certainty) (152). The 65 trial subsequently compared “permissive hypotension” 
(MAP 60–65 mm Hg) to “usual care” in patients 65 
years old and older with distributive shock (153). The 
intervention arm achieved a mean MAP of 67 mm Hg, 
compared with 73 mm Hg in the usual care arm (153). 
Among 2463 patients analyzed, there was less exposure 
to vasopressors in the intervention arm, measured by 
duration of vasopressor infusion and total vasopressor 
dosing (153). Ninety-day mortality in the permissive 
hypotension vs. usual care arm was similar (41.0% vs. 
43.8%). An individual patient level meta-analysis that 
included this trial and two others reported a point es-
timate for mortality that suggested benefit with a lower 
blood pressure target compared with a higher target, 
but the CI did not exclude the possibility of harm 
(RR 0.93; 95% CI, 0.76–1.07, low certainty) (154). 
In a meta-analysis done for the guidelines limited to 
patients 65 years old or older, a lower blood pressure 
target was associated with reduced mortality at longest 
follow-up (RR 0.89, 95% CI, 0.81–0.98, high certainty). 
An open-label trial of 518 patients 65 years old or older 
randomized to a lower BP target (MAP 65–70 mm Hg) 
compared with a higher BP target (MAP 80–85 mm 
Hg) was published after the guidelines meta-analysis 
was completed (155). This trial reported increased 
mortality associated with the higher MAP target.
In the absence of data to support a higher MAP 
target, the panel continues to recommend an initial 
MAP target of 65 mm Hg over higher MAP targets 
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty evi-
dence) and makes a new conditional recommendation 
for an initial MAP target of 60–65 mm Hg over higher 
targets in adults 65 years old or older (conditional rec-
ommendation, low certainty evidence) in the setting 
of new evidence suggesting potential benefit of a lower 
MAP target (153, 154).
There is a paucity of evidence from low resource set-
tings; however, implementation of these recommenda-
tions is likely to be feasible in all settings (156).
Admission to Intensive Care
15. For adults with sepsis or septic shock 
who require ICU admission, we “suggest” 
admitting the patients to the ICU within 6 hr.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
This statement on performance was carried over, see 
the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Prescott et al22     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4INFECTION
Timing of Antibiotic Initiation in Hospital
16.  For adults with possible, probable, or 
definite septic shock, we “recommend” 
administering antimicrobial therapy 
immediately, ideally within 1 hr of 
recognition.
(strong recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
17 . For adults with probable or definite sepsis 
without shock, we “recommend” administer-
ing antimicrobial therapy immediately, ideally 
within 1 hr of recognition.
(strong recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)Revisited
18. For adults with possible sepsis without 
shock, we “suggest” a time-limited course 
of rapid investigation and if concern for 
infection persists, the administration of 
antimicrobial therapy within 3 hours from the 
time when sepsis was first suspected.
(conditional recommendation, very low cer-
tainty of evidence)Revisited
19. Clinicians should perform a rapid assess-
ment of the likelihood of infectious vs. nonin-
fectious causes of acute illness in adults 
with possible sepsis without shock.
(good practice statement)Revisited
20. For adults with a low likelihood of infection 
and without shock, we “suggest” deferring 
antimicrobial therapy while continuing to 
closely monitor the patient.
(conditional recommendation, very low 
certainty of evidence)Revisited
Early administration of appropriate antimicrobial 
therapy is the most effective initial intervention to re-
duce mortality in patients with sepsis or septic shock, 
along with fluid resuscitation (157–159). Delivering 
antimicrobial therapy to patients with sepsis or 
septic shock should therefore be treated as an emer -
gency. This may include newly initiating antimicro-
bial therapy or broadening antimicrobial therapy in 
a patient who decompensates while being treated for 
infection. The imperative to administer appropriate 
antimicrobial therapy as early as possible, however, 
must be balanced against the potential undesirable 
effects of unnecessary antimicrobial use in patients 
without infection (160, 161), including antimicro-
bial resistance, disruption to the microbiome (162), 
and other antibiotic-associated adverse events (163). Consideration of unnecessary antimicrobial exposure 
is warranted since approximately 10–30% of patients 
initially treated for sepsis have a final diagnosis of 
noninfectious or non-bacterial conditions (164–168). 
However, simultaneous improvement in timing of 
antimicrobial delivery for sepsis and antimicrobial 
stewardship are possible (169). Evaluating the likeli-
hood of infection (Table 3) and severity of illness for 
each patient with suspected sepsis should inform the 
necessity and urgency of antimicrobial therapy (160, 
161) (Fig. 2).
We identified a systematic review and meta- 
analysis which included 42 observational studies 
through May 22, 2022 comprising 190,896 patients 
(170). We combined the data from this meta-analysis 
with two additional observational studies published 
after May 22, 2022 (171, 172) and two RCTs (13, 173). 
Overall, early antimicrobial therapy was associated 
with a reduction in short-term mortality for adults 
with sepsis or septic shock, including patients who re-
ceived antibiotics within 1 hour (vs. longer), 3 hours 
(vs. longer), and 6 hours (vs. longer) from presenta-
tion, albeit with wide CIs that included no difference. 
This association was present in both combined and 
in separate analyses, including the primary analyses 
and in sensitivity analyses restricting the evidence to 
studies using the Sepsis-3 definition, as well as those 
providing adjusted estimates. The observed mortality 
reduction associated with early antimicrobial therapy 
appeared strongest and most consistent in patients 
with septic shock. The recommended thresholds for 
administering antimicrobial therapy, that is, within 1 
and 3 hours, were selected based on the available sum-
mary estimates, whereas balancing the weaknesses 
of the underlying evidence (observational studies at 
high risk of bias with CIs that included no difference, 
and limited power in some analyses) against the high 
morbidity and mortality of sepsis. The two RCTs did 
not show an association between early treatment and 
reduced mortality but they primarily included patients 
without septic shock, and the median differences in 
time-to-antibiotics between the early vs. later antibi-
otic arms were well under 3 hours (13, 173).
Despite the growth in evidence since the 2021 SSC 
guidelines (65, 66), the overall certainty of evidence 
was adjudicated as very low due to persistent risk of 
bias (the main body of evidence comprised of ob-
servational studies with an inherent risk of residual 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     23confounding, and most studies used inadequate risk 
adjustment), inconsistency, indirectness (variations in 
population/intervention/comparator and in the defini-
tion of time zero), and imprecision.
To increase the certainty of evidence for the effects 
of early antimicrobial therapy in adults with sepsis or 
septic shock, large high-quality multicenter (interna-
tional) RCTs would be needed. Whether these are fea-
sible from practical, resource, and ethical perspectives 
is unlikely.
The recommendations on timing of antimicrobial 
therapy are unchanged from the 2021 SSC guidelines 
(65, 66).
Given the high risk of death with septic shock and 
the more consistent and stronger association of anti-
microbial timing and short-term mortality in patients 
with septic shock, the panel issued a strong recom-
mendation to administer antimicrobial therapy imme-
diately (within 1 hr) in adults with possible, probable, 
and definite septic shock and in adults with probable or definite sepsis (Table 3). For adults with possible 
sepsis without shock, where the diagnosis of bacterial 
infection is less clear, the panel issued a conditional 
recommendation for a rapid (within 3 hr) assessment 
of infectious and noninfectious etiologies of illness. 
This assessment may include additional history, clin-
ical examination, and diagnostic testing to determine 
whether antimicrobial therapy should be adminis-
tered. Antimicrobial therapy should be administered 
as soon as bacterial infection appears to be the most 
likely etiology of the patient’s illness and after no more 
than 3 hours if a substantial concern for bacterial in-
fection persists.
Limited data from low resource settings suggest 
that timely administration of antimicrobial therapy in 
patients with sepsis and septic shock is also beneficial 
and feasible in these settings (174–178). Access and 
availability of a wide range of antimicrobial therapy may 
vary, however (179–183). Similarly, the availability and 
turnaround time for laboratory testing, rapid diagnostic 
Figure 2. Antimicrobial timing framework.
Prescott et al24     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4tests, and imaging also vary widely by regions and set-
tings (176). For this reason, the components of the rapid 
assessment for infectious vs. noninfectious causes of 
illness will vary by setting. In recognition of the vari-
ation in diagnostic testing capabilities, a recent Delphi 
panel of global experts recommended: “for adults with 
possible sepsis without shock, where investigators (such 
as laboratory or imaging) to exclude a noninfectious 
source of acute illness are not readily available and if 
concern for infection persists, antimicrobial therapy 
should be administered without delay” (184).
Timing of Antibiotic Initiation En Route to 
Hospital
21.  For adults with definite or probable sepsis and 
hypotension (i.e., septic shock) and who have an 
anticipated time to in-hospital medical evaluation 
of over 60 min, we “suggest” administering 
antimicrobial therapy in ambulance or flight.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Prehospital antibiotic delivery should 
be implemented only after having a structured 
process in place to screen for sepsis in ambulance 
or flight, as discussed in recommendation 3. New 
Prehospital sepsis treatment is one way to reduce the 
time to antibiotic administration for the half of sepsis 
patients who arrive by ambulance (51–53). Prehospital 
interventions are common in other conditions and have 
improved outcomes for acutely ill patients (185–188).
Three systematic reviews evaluated the impact of 
prehospital IV antibiotics on survival (58, 189, 190). 
Most studies were observational. Meta-analysis of 
observational studies was uncertain but suggested a 
possible reduction in mortality with prehospital antibi-
otics (OR 0.58; 95% CI, 0.41–0.84, very low certainty). 
Meta-analysis of RCTs also suggested that prehospital 
antibiotics may reduce 28-day mortality (OR 0.85; 95% 
CI, 0.66–1.09, low certainty), with most of the estimate 
weight attributed to a single trial. One high-quality 
trial showed no difference in 28-day mortality (RR 
0.95; 95% CI, 0.74–1.24) when antibiotics were given 
96 min sooner in the prehospital intervention arm, but 
the control arm mortality was only 8%, suggesting a 
low aggregate illness severity (173). The two studies 
with the lowest relative mortality reduction had the 
lowest control group mortality, whereas the two stud-
ies with the greatest mortality reduction had the high-
est control group mortality (173, 191–193). Given this relationship, the panel tailored this recommendation 
to patients with evidence of septic shock, as demon-
strated by definite or probable sepsis and hypotension 
(e.g., SBP < 90; MAP < 65; SBP < 100 in patients with 
known hypertension).
The panel also considered emergency medical services 
(EMS) system characteristics. In EMS systems with short 
transport times and rapid hospital antibiotic delivery, 
prehospital antibiotics may have limited benefit, whereas 
the impact may be greater in settings with longer trans-
port times or prolonged within hospital delays. Some 
studies with the greatest time-to-antibiotic reductions 
were those in which delays occurred after hospital arrival 
(192). Consequently, the panel limited this recommen-
dation to those in whom the total medical contact delay 
(time from EMS arrival to in-hospital evaluation) (194) 
was projected to exceed 60 minutes, consistent with the 
recommendation to administer antimicrobial therapy 
within 1 hour for patients with septic shock.
Prehospital antibiotic administration may not be 
feasible in all settings (e.g., LMIC) due to logistical, 
financial, and regulatory constraints; therefore, early 
sepsis identification and rapid hospital transport re-
main the highest priority. In other settings, tiered re-
sponse systems mean that antibiotic availability may 
be limited to a small number of EMS agencies.
Based on the evidence, the panel determined that 
the balance of effects probably favors prehospital anti-
biotic administration in patients with sepsis and hypo-
tension and who have an anticipated time to in-hospital 
medical evaluation of over 60 minutes. Prehospital an-
tibiotic delivery, if implemented, should be integrated 
into regional sepsis care models to ensure availability 
and safety for patients most likely to benefit. Wherever 
possible, blood cultures should be collected before an-
tibiotic administration.
Biomarker-Guided Initiation of Antimicrobial 
Therapy
22.  For adults with possible or probable sepsis 
or septic shock, we “suggest” using clinical 
evaluation alone over procalcitonin plus 
clinical evaluation to decide whether to start 
antimicrobial therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
This statement on performance was carried over, see 
the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     25Source Control
23.  Adults with sepsis or septic shock should 
be rapidly evaluated for specific anatomical 
diagnoses or sources of infection that 
require emergent source control.
(good practice statement) Carryover 
24.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock 
and a specific anatomical diagnosis or 
source of infection that requires source 
control, we “suggest” early source control 
over late source control, ideally within 6 hr 
of diagnosis of sepsis or septic shock 
requiring source control.
(conditional recommendation, very low 
certainty evidence)Revisited
Source control is a fundamental principle in the man-
agement of sepsis and septic shock (66, 195). It encom-
passes surgical and procedural interventions to remove 
the source of infection, reduce the pathogen burden, or 
correct anatomical issues that impede normal clearance 
of infection. Examples include draining an abscess, 
debriding infected necrotic tissue, removing a poten-
tially infected device, or relieving anatomical blockage 
such as a biliary stricture (196). Common foci of infec-
tion that are amenable to source control include intra-
abdominal abscesses, peritonitis due to gastrointestinal 
perforation, cholangitis, cholecystitis, pelvic abscesses, 
pyelonephritis associated with obstruction or abscess, 
necrotizing soft-tissue infection, other deep space infec-
tions (e.g., empyema or septic arthritis), and infections 
related to implanted devices including central catheters 
(196, 197). Source control should be achieved as soon 
as possible following initial resuscitation (198, 199), but 
the optimal timeframe is unclear.
We identified 11 relevant observational studies (198–
208). Studies defined early source control in various ways, 
most commonly as source control within 6 hours from ei-
ther diagnosis or sepsis, diagnosis of septic shock, or iden-
tification of the need for source control. Meta-analysis of 
these studies yielded uncertain findings due to the very 
low certainty of evidence. However, point estimates sug-
gest early source control may possibly reduce short-term 
(up to day 90) mortality (RR 0.70; 95% CI, 0.51–0.95, very 
low certainty), as compared with late source control. One 
study evaluated mortality beyond 90 days and suggested 
that early source control may result in a large reduction 
in one-year mortality (RR 0.80; 95% CI, 0.71–0.95, very 
low certainty), as compared with late source control. ICU 
LOS may be slightly reduced (MD 2.4 d fewer; 95% CI, 6.3 d fewer to 1.5 d more, very low certainty), while im-
pact of hospital LOS (MD 1.1 d fewer, 8.5 d fewer to 6.3 d 
more) was trivial.
Based on the association between early source con-
trol and improved clinical outcomes, the panel issued a 
conditional recommendation for early source control in 
adults with sepsis or septic shock and a specific anatom-
ical diagnosis or source of infection that requires source 
control, as compared with late source control. Any re-
quired source control intervention in patients with sepsis 
or septic shock should ideally be implemented as soon 
as medically and logistically practical and safe after the 
diagnosis is made (200). Given the observational stud-
ies that typically reported early source control as within 
6 hours, the panel proposed this timeframe, but earlier 
source control is consider better when feasible. Prolonged 
efforts at medical stabilization without source control for 
severely ill patients, particularly those with septic shock, 
are unlikely to succeed (209).
The recommendation for early source control is con-
sistent with the 2021 SSC guidelines, which included a 
best practice statement in favor of early source control 
(65, 66), as well as other guidelines (210–214).
Additional data on the optimal source control inter -
ventions, for example, invasive vs. minimally invasive 
source control and percutaneous drainage vs. surgery, 
and relevant measures of adequate resuscitation before 
source control procedures are research priorities.
Empiric Multidrug Resistant (MDR) Pathogen 
Coverage
25.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock at high risk of 
infection with a specific multidrug resistant (MDR) 
pathogen, we “suggest” using empirical antimicrobial 
therapy with coverage for this MDR pathogen.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Risk factors for MDR pathogens include 
colonization with the MDR pathogen of concern, 
previous infection with the MDR pathogen of concern, 
prolonged use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, 
and prolonged hospitalization in a unit with a high 
prevalence of the MDR pathogen of concern. New
 
26.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock at low risk 
of infection with a specific MDR pathogen, we 
“suggest against” using empirical antimicrobial 
therapy with coverage for this MDR pathogen.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)New
Prescott et al26     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4The decision on whether to include an antimicrobial 
agent active against specific multidrug resistant (MDR) 
pathogen(s) of concern in the empiric treatment reg-
imen for adults with sepsis or septic shock depends 
upon 1) the likelihood that the patient’s infection is 
caused by a specific MDR pathogen, 2) the risk of un-
desirable effects associated with withholding empiric 
treatment for a specific MDR pathogen, 3) the risk of 
undesirable effects associated with empiric treatment 
that includes coverage for a specific MDR pathogen in a 
person without infection with this specific MDR path-
ogen, and 4) patient’s severity of illness. MDR patho-
gens, defined as those with acquired non-susceptibility  
to least one agent in three of more antimicrobial cat-
egories (215, 216), include Acinetobacter baumannii , 
extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing 
Gram-negative bacteria, carbapenem-resistant  
Enterobacterales  (CRE), vancomycin-resistant 
Enterococcus , MDR pseudomonas , and methicillin-
resistant S. aureus (MRSA) (217). The incidence of 
different MDR pathogens varies by setting and by pa-
tient characteristics (217, 218). Patient-related risk fac-
tors for MDR pathogens include colonization with the 
MDR pathogen of concern in the prior year, infection 
with the MDR pathogen of concern in the prior year, 
prolonged use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, and pro-
longed hospitalization in a hospital with a high preva-
lence of the MDR pathogen of concern (219–222).
We identified one relevant RCT examining A. bau-
mannii  (223), 4 RCTs examining ESBL-producing 
Gram-negative bacteria (224–227), 5 RCTs examining 
CRE (228–232), and a systematic review of 15 observa-
tional studies examining MRSA infections (233).
Meta-analysis of these studies yielded very low cer -
tainty evidence but suggested a possible reduction in 
short-term mortality with the use of empiric antimi-
crobial therapy with MDR coverage, as compared with 
no MDR coverage (OR 0.71; 95% CI, 0.56–0.92, very 
low certainty). This effect was driven by the obser -
vational data evaluating MRSA infection. There was 
no observed difference in short-term mortality for 
patients with A. baumannii , ESBL-producing Gram-
negative bacteria, or CRE treated with agents active 
against these pathogens vs. agents that were not.
The panel determined that the balance between the 
desirable and undesirable effects of empiric MDR cov-
erage varies by setting and patient-related characteris-
tics and that MDR coverage in every adult with sepsis or septic shock would be unacceptable and result in 
increased harm, particularly as a minority of sepsis cases 
worldwide are caused by MDRs (4, 234–236). However, 
selective use of empiric MDR coverage is warranted in 
patients with risk factors for MDR infection, including in 
many patients with hospital-acquired infections.
Additional data on the efficacy and safety of em-
piric MDR pathogen coverage is warranted, along with 
studies evaluating nasal swab testing, rapid diagnostic 
tools, and clinical prediction rules for the selection of 
patients for specific MDR coverage.
Failure to cover specific MDR pathogens in a patient 
with sepsis or septic shock caused by that specific path-
ogen may be harmful, but unnecessary specific MDR 
coverage in a patient without that specific pathogen 
may also be harmful. Therefore, the panel issued a con-
ditional recommendation for using empiric MDR cov-
erage in patients with a likelihood of infection with a 
specific MDR pathogen.
Specific guidance on antibiotic selection is beyond 
the scope of this guideline. We direct readers to rel-
evant European Society of Clinical Microbiology and 
Infectious Diseases and Infectious Diseases Society of 
America guidelines on the treatment of MDR patho-
gens (216, 237). Also, where available, consultation 
with infectious disease specialists and/or clinical 
microbiologists should be considered to help with se-
lection of antimicrobial therapy in patients with risk 
factors for MDR pathogens.
Empiric Antifungal Coverage
27 .  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using empirical antifungal 
therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Empiric antifungal therapy should 
be considered on a case-by-case basis 
in selected patients with sepsis or septic 
shock and risk factors for fungal infection, 
including immunosuppression, prolonged use 
of antibiotics, prolonged hospitalization, and 
intra-abdominal sources of infection. Revisited
 
Sepsis and septic shock due to fungi are most commonly 
observed in patients in the ICU and are associated with 
poor outcomes (103, 238–241). While prompt initiation 
of early appropriate empiric antibacterial therapy is war -
ranted in adults with sepsis or septic shock, the impact 
of adding empiric antifungal therapy is less certain (239, 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     27242–244). Although patients with sepsis or septic shock 
may not benefit from empiric antifungals in general, 
selected patients with a high absolute risk for fungal in-
fection probably will benefit. Risk factors for fungal in-
fection include immunosuppression, prolonged exposure 
to antibacterial drugs, prolonged hospitalization, and an 
intra-abdominal source of infection (245).
We identified a relevant systematic review and 
meta-analysis of seven RCTs (246), including the 
EMPIRICUS trial (247). No additional trials were 
identified, and the evidence base was unchanged from 
the 2021 SSC guidelines (65, 66).
Meta-analysis suggested that there may be no impor -
tant reduction in short-term mortality with the use of 
empiric antifungal therapy, as compared with no antifun-
gal therapy (RR 0.93; 95% CI, 0.66–1.32, low certainty).
The panel agreed that empiric antifungal therapy 
is not indicated in every adult with sepsis or septic 
shock. Generalized use of empiric antifungal therapy 
in all adults with sepsis or septic shock may result in 
reduced equity globally.
The recommendation is consistent with other recent 
guidelines (210, 248).
Additional data on the efficacy and safety of empiric 
antifungal therapy in specific subgroups of patients 
with risk factors are warranted.
Failure to use empiric antifungal therapy in a pa-
tient with a fungal infection may be harmful, but 
unnecessary use of empiric antifungal therapy in a pa-
tient without a fungal infection may also be harmful. 
Therefore, the panel issued a conditional recommen-
dation against the use of empiric antifungal therapy in 
all adults with sepsis or septic shock but rather to con-
sider empiric antifungal therapy in selected patients 
with high absolute risk of fungal infection.
Empiric Anaerobic Coverage
28.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock without 
risk factors for anaerobic infection, we “suggest” 
using an empiric antibiotic regimen without 
anaerobic coverage.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of 
evidence)
Remark: When coverage of potential multidrug-
resistant (MDR) pathogens is required, agents 
with anaerobic activity (e.g., piperacillin–
tazobactam or carbapenems) are appropriate 
when alternative agents lacking anaerobic 
coverage are insufficient. New 29.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock with 
specific risk factors for anaerobic infection, we 
“suggest” using an empiric antibiotic regimen 
that includes anaerobic coverage.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of 
evidence)
Remark: Risk factors for anaerobic infection include 
intra-abdominal or deep seated gynecological/
obstetric source of infection, necrotizing soft-
tissue infection, head and neck infection, and CNS 
abscesses or empyema.New
The prevalence of sepsis and septic shock due to an-
aerobic bacteria is low, compared with aerobic bacteria 
and fungi (217). Prompt initiation of appropriate em-
piric antimicrobial therapy is warranted in adults with 
sepsis or septic shock, and the decision to include or 
withhold anaerobic coverage depends on the anatom-
ical site of infection, which influences likelihood of an-
aerobic infection (249). Patients with sepsis or septic 
shock, particularly of lung or urinary origin, are un-
likely to benefit from empiric anaerobic coverage; by 
contrast, selected patients with specific risk factors 
for anaerobic infection will likely benefit (250, 251). 
Clinical scenarios with increased risk of anaerobic in-
fection include intra-abdominal, gynecological, and 
obstetric sources of infection, necrotizing soft-tissue 
infection, head and neck infection, empyema, and 
CNS abscesses (252, 253).
We identified a relevant systematic review and meta-
analysis of two RCTs (254) that comprised the primary 
evidence base. Furthermore, we identified several rel-
evant observational studies (255–257). The panel also 
discussed whether to include the ACORN trial (com-
paring empiric cefepime vs. piperacillin-tazobactam), 
but did not do so, since it did not adequately fit the 
PICO question (258). ACORN was deemed too indi-
rect as it compared two specific antibiotics, not inclu-
sion of anti-anaerobic coverage, and many patients in 
the cefepime arm were co-treated with metronidazole 
for anti-anaerobic coverage (258).
In meta-analysis of the two RCTs, there was an un-
certain impact of empiric anti-anaerobic coverage 
in general population of adult patients with sepsis 
or septic shock, as compared with no anaerobic cov-
erage (RR 1.56; 95% CI, 0.39–6.35, very low certainty). 
Observational studies suggested an increased risk of 
adverse outcomes, including increased mortality in 
patients treated with empiric anti-anaerobic antibiot-
ics (255–257).
Prescott et al28     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4The panel agreed that routine empiric anti- 
anaerobic coverage is not indicated.
The recommendation is consistent with other guide-
lines (259, 260) and in line with research on the an-
aerobic microbiome (261). It is also applicable to low 
resource settings.
Additional trial data on the efficacy and safety of 
empiric anaerobic coverage in adults with sepsis or 
septic shock are warranted, given the suggestion of 
harm in observational studies.
Withholding empiric anaerobic coverage in an 
adult with anaerobic infection may be harmful, but 
unnecessary use of empiric anaerobic coverage in an 
adult without anaerobic infection may also be harm-
ful (255–257). Therefore, the panel issued conditional 
recommendations for including vs. withholding em-
piric anaerobic coverage based on risk of anaerobic 
infection.
Microbiological Surveillance to Guide Empirical 
Antimicrobial Therapy
30.  There is “insufficient evidence” to make a 
recommendation regarding use of departmental 
(i.e., ICU-wide) microbiological surveillance 
samples of the upper respiratory tract to guide 
empirical antimicrobial therapy. New
 
Infections with multidrug-resistant organisms, espe-
cially healthcare-associated infections, are a global 
concern (262). Active surveillance cultures can be used 
to identify patients colonized with multidrug-resistant 
organisms, which may inform preventive measures, 
including isolation; to reduce transmission; and to 
guide empiric antimicrobial therapy (217, 263). Active 
surveillance cultures of the upper respiratory tract may 
be particularly useful to guide empiric antimicrobial 
therapy of respiratory infections, including ventilator-
associated pneumonia (V AP).
We identified two systematic reviews on screening 
strategies (264, 265), implemented at the department 
or unit level, to detect carbapenem-resistant gram- 
negative bacteria, but none of the included trials 
assessed microbiological surveillance samples of the 
upper respiratory tract. We also identified an older 
diagnostic test accuracy review, but no relevant clin-
ical outcomes were assessed (266). Thus, the body of 
evidence was insufficient to make a recommenda-
tion regarding the use of microbiological surveillance samples of the upper respiratory tract to guide empir -
ical antimicrobial therapy.
“In our practice, ” 36% of the panel uses depart-
mental surveillance samples of the upper respiratory 
tract to guide empirical antimicrobial therapy, whereas 
64% of the panel does not. Among panel members 
using surveillance samples, the majority (79%) collect 
samples weekly.
With increasing prevalence of some multidrug-
resistant organisms (267) and insufficient evidence to 
inform a recommendation regarding use of surveil-
lance cultures of the upper respiratory tract, the panel 
believes that knowledge about the clinical effects of sur -
veillance cultures of the upper respiratory tract to guide 
empirical antimicrobial therapy is a research priority.
Pathogen-Specific Rapid Diagnostic Tests
31.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” using pathogen-specific rapid 
diagnostic tests on a case-by-case basis in 
selected patients based on clinical features, local 
pathogen- and resistance patterns, seasonality, 
and availability of tests and antibiotic stewardship 
guidance.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence) New 
Pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests are used to guide 
empiric antimicrobial therapy (268). Such tests may in-
clude molecular PCR-based tests, phenotypic assays, res-
piratory and other syndromic panels, or antimicrobial 
resistance detection, each offering either rapid identifi-
cation of pathogens or resistance detection to guide anti-
microbial therapy. This may enable clinicians to better 
target antimicrobial therapy, thereby improving clinical 
outcomes and reducing both the unnecessary prescrip-
tion of broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy and the 
development of antimicrobial resistance.
We identified a relevant systematic review and 
meta-analysis of 6 RCTs (269) and supplemented this 
with one additional RCT since its publication (270). 
The review included trials assessing different types 
of pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests, including 
molecular testing platforms and phenotypic assays in 
adults with bloodstream infection.
There was possibly little to no difference in short-
term mortality with the use of pathogen-specific rapid 
diagnostic tests, as compared with not using them (RR 
1.03; 95% CI, 0.78–1.13, low certainty).
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     29The panel agreed that the tests should not be used in 
every adult with sepsis or septic shock, as generalized 
use of them in all adults with sepsis or septic shock 
is expected to result in increased costs without being 
clearly beneficial to all patients. The use of these tests 
in selected patients, however, may reduce the time to 
appropriate and definite antimicrobial therapy, which 
may in turn improve outcomes and reduce antimicro-
bial resistance. The use of these tests in isolation may 
have a limited impact on patient-important outcomes 
(271–273), but mortality benefits have been observed 
when rapid diagnostic tests are paired with effective 
antimicrobial stewardship programs (274).
Additional trial data on the efficacy and safety of 
subtypes of pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests 
in high-risk patients with sepsis or septic shock,  
cost-effectiveness, and the long-term effects, including 
on antimicrobial resistance patterns, were identified as 
research priorities.
Although the use of pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic 
tests is not indicated in all adults with sepsis or septic 
shock, it may optimize the use of antimicrobial therapy 
in some. Therefore, the panel issued a conditional recom-
mendation for the use of pathogen-specific rapid diag-
nostic tests in selected adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
based on clinical features, local pathogen- and resistance 
patterns, seasonality, and availability of tests and antibi-
otic stewardship guidance. Since most low resource set-
tings do not have access to these tests, the generalizability 
of this recommendation to LMICs is limited.
Candida Fungal Biomarkers to Guide Initiation 
of Antifungal Therapy
32.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using Candida fungal 
biomarkers to guide initiation of empiric 
antifungal therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Use of Candida biomarkers to guide 
initiation of empiric antifungal therapy may be 
considered on a case-by-case basis in selected 
patients at high risk of Candida infection, 
including those with immunosuppression, 
prolonged exposure to antibiotics, prolonged 
hospitalization, and intra-abdominal source of 
infection. New 
Sepsis and septic shock caused by fungi are less 
common but associated with poor outcomes (103, 238–241). Although it is crucial to start appropriate 
empiric antibacterial therapy promptly in adults with 
sepsis or septic shock, the benefit of adding empiric 
antifungal therapy remains uncertain (239, 242–244). 
Antifungal therapy is associated with clinically impor -
tant undesirable effects, including drug-drug interac-
tions, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, hyponatremia, 
phototoxicity, visual disturbances, encephalopathy, 
peripheral neuropathy, and selection of resistant fungi 
(275–278). Empiric use of antifungal therapy is there-
fore not indicated for all patients with sepsis or septic 
shock, but may be beneficial in selected patients at high 
absolute risk of fungal infection. Generally, patients 
with sepsis or septic shock may not benefit from em-
piric antifungals, but utilizing fungal biomarkers may 
help identify patients who may benefit (279).
We identified one relevant RCT that assessed the 
use of (1,3)-β-d-glucan to guide initiation of empiric 
antifungal therapy in septic patients with high risk of 
invasive Candida  infection (280). Use of (1,3)-β-d-
glucan to guide initiation of empiric antifungal therapy 
resulted in a possible slight decrease in mortality, as 
compared with not using the biomarker (RR 0.95; 95% 
CI, 0.71–1.28, low certainty).
The panel agreed that Candida  biomarkers should 
not be used to guide the initiation of empiric antifun-
gal therapy in every adult with sepsis or septic shock, 
as this is expected to result in increased costs with un-
certain benefits. Use in selected patients at high risk 
of invasive candidiasis, however, may be relevant and 
improve clinical outcomes and reduce antimicrobial 
resistance.
The recommendation is consistent with other re-
cent guidelines (210, 248) and aligns with the condi-
tional recommendation against empiric antifungal 
therapy in this guideline. The International Guideline 
on Candidiasis moderately recommends using serum 
(1,3)-β-d-glucan for diagnosis of invasive Candida  
infection, but cautions that diagnosis should not be 
based solely on (1,3)-β-d-glucan, and that (1,3)-β-d-
glucan alone is not recommended for initiating anti-
fungal therapy (248).
Additional trial data examining the efficacy and 
safety of using fungal biomarkers to guide the initia-
tion of empiric antifungal therapy is a research priority.
Failure to give empiric antifungal therapy to a patient 
with fungal infection may be harmful, but unnecessary 
use of empiric antifungal therapy in a patient without 
Prescott et al30     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4fungal infection may also be harmful. Therefore, the 
panel issued a conditional recommendation against the 
use of Candida  biomarkers to guide initiation of empiric 
antifungal therapy in adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
whereas their use in selected patients based on an assess-
ment of the risk of fungal infection may be considered.
Prolonged Infusion of β-Lactam Antibiotics
33.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” using prolonged infusion of 
beta-lactams for maintenance (after an initial 
loading dose) over bolus administration.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
Key pharmacokinetic parameters of beta-lactam antibi-
otics can change in patients with sepsis and septic shock, 
potentially leading to sub-therapeutic concentrations 
(281, 282). Unlike traditional intermittent bolus infusion 
(lasting 30 min or less), administering beta-lactam anti-
biotics via prolonged IV infusion—either as an extended 
infusion (over at least half of the dosing interval) or as a 
continuous infusion—maintains consistent beta-lactam 
concentrations that maximize the pharmacodynamics 
of these drugs (283, 284). The shorter the half-life of the 
drug, the greater the impact of extended or continuous 
infusion has on drug concentrations. Whether the pro-
longed infusion translated into improved outcomes was 
previously unclear, but additional evidence from large 
RCTs has become available.
We identified a recent systematic review and meta-
analysis of 18 RCTs (9,108 participants) (285), in-
cluding the large international BLING III RCT (286). 
Meta-analysis of these trials showed that prolonged 
infusions reduce short-term mortality (RR 0.91; 95% 
CI, 0.85–0.97, high certainty, which translates to 25 
fewer deaths per 1,000 patients, 95% CI, 42 fewer to 
8 fewer). In the one RCT that assessed days alive out-
side of ICU and hospital, prolonged infusion of beta- 
lactams likely resulted in more days alive out of ICU 
(MD 1.5 d more, 95 CI, 0.1 fewer to 3.0 more, mod-
erate certainty) and out of the hospital (MD 1.8 d 
more, 95 CI, 0.3 more to 3.3 more, high certainty) than 
intermittent infusion (bolus) (286).
Prolonged infusion is a viable intervention when suit-
able IV access is available and when resources can ensure 
that the beta-lactam is infused over the required dura-
tion. This may pose challenges in low resource settings 
with insufficient supply of infusion pumps. Increasing the supply of necessary supplies to administer prolonged 
infusion of beta-lactams should be prioritized given the 
very high probability of mortality benefit, particularly 
when using beta-lactams with a shorter half-life (e.g., 
piperacillin-tazobactam, carbapenems).
Administering a loading dose of the antibiotic be-
fore prolonged infusion is crucial to avoid delays in 
reaching effective beta-lactam concentrations (287). 
Throughout therapy, both extended and continuous 
infusions will occupy a venous catheter lumen for a 
longer duration than intermittent infusions, making 
drug stability and drug-drug compatibility important 
considerations to ensure the effectiveness of antibiotic 
and other IV drug therapies (288, 289).
The recommendation is consistent with the 2021 
SSC guidelines (65, 66), but with BLING III (286) data 
available, the certainty of evidence was assessed as 
high. This informed a strong recommendation in favor 
of the intervention. By contrast, the Dutch guidelines 
for empirical antibacterial therapy for sepsis include a 
strong recommendation for prolonged or continuous 
infusion of piperacillin-tazobactam and carbapenems, 
but a conditional (weak) recommendation for pro-
longed of continuous infusion of other beta-lactam 
antibiotics due to their longer half-life (290).
The research priorities include the effects of pro-
longed infusions on the emergence of antimicrobial 
resistance.
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (TDM) of 
Antimicrobial Therapy
34. For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” using antimicrobial therapeutic drug 
monitoring (TDM) on a case-by-case basis in 
selected patients, based on clinical features, 
local pathogen- and resistance patterns, drug 
class, and availability of TDM.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
Antimicrobial therapy is subject to changes in pharma-
cokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) properties 
in sepsis and septic shock (291, 292). This may result 
in concentrations that are either too low (risking clin-
ical failure) or too high (potentially leading to toxicity) 
(293). Augmented renal clearance (294), acute kidney 
injury (295), hypoalbuminemia (296), RRT (297, 298), 
extracorporeal life support (299, 300), and other con-
ditions affect concentrations of many antimicrobials 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     31in critically ill patients. Therapeutic drug monitoring 
(TDM) is a dosing intervention applying PK/PD prin-
ciples that may result in more effective and safe dosing 
of antimicrobial therapy (301).
We identified a recent systematic review and meta-
analysis of eight RCTs (1241 participants) (302) with 
6 trials assessing TDM of antibacterials and two trials 
assessing TDM of antifungals. The results of the meta-
analysis were uncertain (very low certainty evidence). 
However, point estimates suggested a possible reduc-
tion in short-term mortality with the use of TDM, 
as compared with not using TDM (RR 0.92, 95% 
CI, 0.75–1.11, very low certainty) (302), whereas the 
effects for ICU LOS (MD 0.01 d fewer; 95% CI, 2.27 d 
fewer to 2.25 d more, very low certainty) and hospital 
LOS (MD 0.20 d more; 95% CI, 6.03 d fewer to 6.42 d 
more, very low certainty) were considered trivial. The 
potential effect on short-term mortality was driven by 
the trials assessing TDM of antibacterials.
The use of TDM to guide dosing of antimicrobial 
therapy may require extra resources and may therefore 
result in increased costs and reduced equity, especially 
in resource-limited areas where there is limited access 
to TDM.
The recommendation is consistent with the 2021 SSC 
guidelines, which included a best practice statement to use 
accepted pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic principles 
(66), and consistent with other guidelines (301).
The research priorities include additional trial data 
on short- and long-term mortality, emergence of anti-
microbial resistance, and health economic analyses.
Based on a potential effect of TDM on the assessed 
desirable outcomes and no indication of harm, the 
panel suggests using TDM as an optimized dosing 
approach applying PK/PD principles in selected adults 
with sepsis and septic shock, and if the necessary 
equipment for TDM is available.
Antimicrobial De-escalation and 
Discontinuation
35.  Clinicians should continuously reevaluate 
patients, search for alternative diagnoses, 
and discontinue empiric antimicrobial 
therapy if an alternative cause of illness 
is demonstrated or strongly suspected 
in adults with suspected sepsis or septic 
shock but unconfirmed infection.
(good practice statement) Revisited
 36.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” de-escalation of antimicro-
bial therapy over no de-escalation when a 
confirmed microbiological diagnosis and 
susceptibility profile is available.
(strong recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: De-escalation involves discontinuing 
unnecessary antimicrobial therapy or nar-
rowing the spectrum of antimicrobial agents 
where appropriate.Revisited
37 .  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” de-escalation of antimicrobial therapy 
over no de-escalation when no pathogens are 
identified on final culture results.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)Revisited
Antimicrobial exposure is associated with develop-
ment of antimicrobial resistance, potential toxicities, 
and risk for Clostridiodes difficile  infection (163, 167, 
303). Reducing both the number and the spectrum of 
antimicrobial agents may help avert some of these ad-
verse outcomes and is a key goal in hospital antimicro-
bial stewardship (304, 305). Broad-spectrum regimens 
are common during the empiric phase of treating 
sepsis when the causative pathogen has not yet been 
identified. Once pathogen identity and susceptibilities 
are determined, timely de-escalation of antimicrobial 
therapy, including stopping unnecessary antimicrobial 
therapy and switching to narrower spectrum agents, is 
a logical approach (306).
We identified direct evidence from 26 studies, in-
cluding two RCTs (307, 308). Meta-analysis was un-
certain (very low certainty evidence). However, point 
estimates suggested a possible reduction in short-term 
mortality (26 studies, RR 0.77, 95% CI, 0.64–0.92, 
very low certainty), ICU LOS (5 studies, MD 0.93 d 
fewer; 95% CI, 4.42 d fewer to 2.56 d more, very low 
certainty), hospital LOS (4 studies, 1.7 d fewer, 95% 
CI, 1.8 fewer to 1.6 fewer, very low certainty), and 
antimicrobial resistance (6 studies, RR 0.71, 95% CI, 
0.55–0.91, very low certainty) with de-escalation of 
empiric antimicrobial therapy, as compared with no 
de-escalation. The effects were primarily driven by the 
24 observational studies, but effect estimates in the 
two RCTs were comparable. Nonetheless, this allows 
for the possibility that the observed effects of de-  
escalation in observational studies may be mediated 
by de-escalation in patients who are already improv-
ing (i.e., confounding by indication). The reported 
Prescott et al32     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4improvements in clinical outcomes with de-escalation 
should therefore be interpreted with caution (306, 
309).
The recommendations on de-escalation of empiric 
antimicrobial therapy are consistent with other guide-
lines (305, 306, 310), as well as prior SSC guidelines 
(65, 66).
Additional data from larger RCTs are needed to 
confirm the proposed significant desirable effects from 
de-escalation, including the effect on antimicrobial 
resistance.
De-escalation appears safe, may offer cost savings 
when unnecessary antimicrobial therapy are discon-
tinued, and likely results in a reduction in the risk 
of antimicrobial resistance, toxicity, and drug-drug 
interactions (311). Therefore, the panel issued a strong 
recommendation for de-escalation of empiric anti-
microbial therapy when a confirmed microbiological 
diagnosis and susceptibility profile is available, and 
a conditional recommendation for de-escalation in 
patients who are improving when no pathogens are 
identified on final culture(s). The decision to de-escalate  
antibiotics in the absence of a confirmed pathogen 
depends on the clinical context and setting. In low re-
source settings with limited or low-quality laboratory 
services and high rates of MDR pathogens, negative 
culture testing may not provide the same reassurance as 
in settings with high-quality laboratory services avail-
able, so the risk of undetected MDR pathogens should 
be weighed carefully before antibiotic de-escalation.
Biomarker Guidance for Discontinuing 
Antifungal Therapy
38.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock who are 
receiving empiric antifungal therapy, we “suggest 
against” use of Candida fungal biomarkers to guide 
discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence)
Remark: Use of Candida biomarkers to guide 
discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy 
may be considered on a case-by-case basis in 
clinically improving selected patients at high risk 
of Candida infection, including patients with 
immunosuppression, prolonged use of antibiotics, 
prolonged hospitalization, and intra-abdominal 
source of infection. New 
We identified three relevant RCTs (312–314). All 3 tri-
als assessed the use of (1,3)-β-d-glucan and/or man-
nan biomarkers to guide discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy in adult ICU patients with sus-
pected invasive fungal infection.
There was possibly little to no difference in short-
term mortality (3 trials, RR 1.03; 95% CI, 0.72–1.48, 
low certainty), a possible small increase in hospital 
LOS (1 trial, MD 1.8 d more, 95% CI, 4.1 d fewer to 
7.7 d more, low certainty), and a possible increase in 
ICU LOS (1 trial, MD 5.5 d more, 95% CI, 0.9 d fewer 
to 11.9 d more, low certainty) with use of Candida  
biomarkers to guide discontinuation of empiric anti-
fungal therapy, as compared with not using biomarker-
guided discontinuation.
The panel agreed that Candida  biomarkers should 
not be used to guide discontinuation of empiric anti-
fungal therapy in all patients, as the balance of effects 
favors not using them, and uncritical use would result 
in increased costs without clinical benefit. Their use in 
selected high-risk patients (e.g., patients with immu-
nosuppression, prolonged use of antibiotics, prolonged 
hospitalization, and intra-abdominal source of infec-
tion) may be relevant in some settings, as it may reduce 
duration of antifungal treatment and thereby reduce 
the risk of undesirable effects, including selection and 
antimicrobial resistance. The recommendation is con-
sistent with other recent guidelines (210, 248).
Additional trial data on the efficacy and safety of 
using fungal biomarkers to guide discontinuation of 
empiric antifungal therapy, including in subgroups 
of patients with confirmed invasive fungal infection, 
were identified as a research priority.
The unnecessary use of antifungal therapy is associ-
ated with undesirable effects, including selection for anti-
microbial resistance. Use of Candida  biomarkers to assist 
in discontinuing empiric antifungal therapy in adult ICU 
patients does not appear to improve outcomes. Therefore, 
the panel issued a conditional recommendation against 
the use of Candida  biomarkers to guide discontinuation 
of empiric antifungal therapy in all adults with sepsis or 
septic shock, whereas it may be considered in selected 
patients at high risk for invasive candidemia.
Duration of Antimicrobial Therapy
39.  For adults with an initial diagnosis of sepsis 
or septic shock and adequate source 
control, we “suggest” using shorter over 
longer duration of antimicrobial therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     33This statement was carried over, please see the 2021 
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66). Since the 2021 
guidelines, the BALANCE trial comparing 7 vs. 14 
days of antibiotic treatment for bloodstream infec-
tion was published, showing non-inferiority of a 7 day 
treatment duration—providing further support for 
shorter treatment durations.
Biomarker Guidance for Antibiotic 
Discontinuation
40.  For adults with an initial diagnosis of sepsis 
or septic shock and adequate source 
control where optimal duration of therapy is 
unclear, we “suggest” using procalcitonin 
AND clinical evaluation to decide when 
to discontinue antimicrobial therapy over 
clinical evaluation alone.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66). Since the 2021 
guidelines, the ADAPT-Sepsis RCT provided ad-
ditional evidence that procalcitonin can be used to 
safely reduce antibiotic duration in patients with 
sepsis (315).
Selective Decontamination of the Digestive 
Tract
41.  In mechanically ventilated adults with sepsis or 
septic shock in units with a low prevalence of 
antimicrobial resistance, we “suggest” using 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty 
evidence) New 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
(SDD) is a preventive infection control strategy 
consisting of the administration of nonabsorbable, 
topical antimicrobial agents to the oropharynx and 
upper gastrointestinal tract (oropharyngeal decon-
tamination), with the administration of a short-term 
course of broad-spectrum IV antimicrobial therapy 
in mechanically ventilated patients. The topical anti-
microbial agents used typically include a polymyxin, 
tobramycin and amphotericin B, targeting aerobic 
Gram-negative bacteria and fungi while sparing 
anaerobes. SDD is specifically designed to elimi-
nate pathogenic aerobic bacteria while preserving anaerobic gut bacteria, essential to digestion and 
immune function. It has been suggested that SDD 
improves clinical outcomes, including mortality in 
mechanically ventilated adults, through a reduction 
in the incidence of V AP and bloodstream infections 
(316). On the other hand, there are concerns that 
SDD might increase rates of antimicrobial resistance, 
although this has not been confirmed in most studies 
(317, 318). Recently, additional evidence from large 
RCTs has become available.
We identified an up-to-date systematic review 
and meta-analysis of 32 RCTs (24,389 participants) 
(319), including the large international Selective 
Decontamination of the Digestive Tract in ICU Patients 
(SuDDICU) trial (320). Large RCTs on SDD in settings 
with high MDR prevalence are lacking.
The meta-analysis suggested a probable reduc-
tion in short-term mortality (30 trials, RR 0.91; 
95% CI, 0.82–0.99, moderate certainty), more days 
alive of the ICU (1 trial, 1.75 d more; 95% CI, 0.62 
more to 4.12 more, moderate certainty), more days 
alive outside of hospital (1 trial, 1.34 d more; 95% 
CI, 0.89 fewer to 3.58 more, moderate certainty), 
and possibly less antimicrobial resistance (RR 0.64; 
95% CI, 0.50–0.81, 39–103 fewer events per 1000 
patients, low certainty) with the use of SDD as 
compared with no SDD in mechanically ventilated 
adults (319). Counter to concerns, SDD appeared 
to reduce antimicrobial resistance rates. The desir -
able effects of SDD appeared to be mainly driven 
by the trials with individual patient randomiza-
tion and those using SDD in combination with a 
broad-spectrum IV antimicrobial agent targeting 
aerobic Gram-negative bacteria (319).
The panel found it important to consider the local 
prevalence of antimicrobial resistance when deciding 
on using SDD or not, as the balance between the de-
sirable and undesirable effects may be different in set-
tings with a high vs. low prevalence of antimicrobial 
resistance. In low resource settings where prevalence 
of antimicrobial resistance is high and there is limited 
availability of antimicrobial therapy, SDD should be 
implemented on an ICU-by-ICU basis.
The SuDDICU trial was published after SSC guide-
line recommendations were finalized (321). In this 
trial, randomization to SDD was associated with sim-
ilar 90-day mortality (27.9% vs. 29.5%), fewer new 
blood stream infections (4.9% vs. 6.9%), and fewer 
Prescott et al34     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4antibiotic-resistant organisms cultured (16.8% vs. 
26.8%) (321).
Based on the suggested improved clinical outcomes 
from SDD in mechanically ventilated adults, including 
a potential reduction in short-term mortality, the 
panel issued a conditional recommendation for the use 
of SDD in mechanically ventilated adults with sepsis or 
septic shock in settings with a low prevalence of anti-
microbial resistance. In settings with a higher preva-
lence of antimicrobial resistance, the effects of SDD 
on the individual level must be balanced against the potential effects on antimicrobial resistance, although 
SDD has not been shown to increase antimicrobial 
resistance.
HEMODYNAMIC MANAGEMENT
A quick guide for resuscitation and hemodynamic sup-
port in adults with sepsis and septic shock is presented 
in Figure 3. This figure is not a comprehensive sum-
mary of hemodynamic management recommendations 
in the SSC guidelines, but rather a quick reference to 
Figure 3. Quick guide for resuscitation and hemodynamic support in adults with sepsis and septic shock. This figure is intended a quick 
reference summarizing hemodynamic monitoring and interventions for patients with sepsis-induced hypotension of hypoperfusion. It is 
not an exhaustive summary of statements on resuscitation included in the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines. We prioritized inclusion 
of recommendations in this figure to quickly assist with bedside management, including the monitoring and interventions most commonly 
used in clinical practice.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     35summarize the hemodynamic monitoring and resusci-
tation interventions most often used in clinical practice.
Blood Pressure Monitoring
42.  For adults with septic shock, we “suggest” 
using either invasive or noninvasive blood 
pressure monitoring.
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Invasive blood pressure monitoring is 
advised in patients with shock who: require 
intermediate-to-high dose vasopressors, 
escalating doses of vasopressor, or multiple 
vasopressors; are receiving frequent 
arterial blood sampling; or have noninvasive 
blood pressure measurements which are 
inconsistent on repeated assessments. Revisited 
Arterial catheters allow for continuous blood pres-
sure monitoring and frequent blood sampling, so are 
commonly used in critically ill patients. However, var -
iability in use exists across ICUs (322, 323). Potential 
benefits include continuous and more accurate blood 
pressure monitoring, ready access to arterial blood for 
analyses (e.g., blood gases, lactate), and patient com-
fort; potential downsides include risk (e.g., infection, 
thrombosis), costs, and clinician time. The 2021 SSC 
guidelines (65, 66) suggested invasive blood pressure 
monitoring as soon as practical and if resources are 
available based on the discordance of invasive and 
noninvasive measurements.
The panel Identified one RCT (324) in which adults 
admitted to the ICU were randomized in weekly 
blocks to restricted use or standard use of arterial 
catheters. However, this study was reported only in ab-
stract form, considered a mixed population (not just 
sepsis), and had minimal separation in monitoring 
device use between groups; therefore, it was not con-
sidered in recommendation formulation. Instead, we 
relied on 4 observational studies (325–328) (28,516 
total patients) assessing clinical outcomes and 12 stud-
ies (329–340) (57,114 total patients) evaluating blood 
pressure concordance; all evidence was very low cer -
tainty. Despite the very low certainty evidence, no 
difference was observed in mortality (5 studies for in-
vasive vs. noninvasive monitoring: adjusted OR 1.06; 
95% CI, 0.93–1.12) or RRT (1 study: adjusted OR 1.07; 
95% CI, 0.66–1.73). Invasive monitoring was associ-
ated with more acute kidney injury (1 study: adjusted 
OR 1.36; 95% CI, 1.22–1.51) and longer lengths of stay (3 studies, ICU LOS: MD 1.61; 95% CI, 1.13–2.10 
more days; 3 studies, hospital LOS: MD 3.51; 95% CI, 
2.56–4.46 more days); yet potentially substantial re-
sidual confounding likely exists. Complications were 
observed in 2.89% (95% CI 2.18–3.70%) of arterial 
catheters in 1 study. Concordance of noninvasive with 
invasive blood pressure measurements (defined as a < 
10 mm Hg difference) was 73% (95% CI 66–81%) for 
mean pressure (12 studies), 65% (95% CI 44–83%) for 
systolic pressure (7 studies) and 85% (95% CI 71–96%) 
for diastolic pressure (6 studies).
Although concordance of noninvasive with invasive 
blood pressure was moderate, several panel members 
raised concerns that the observed discordance may 
lead to inappropriate vasopressor use or difficulties 
maintaining target blood pressure with a noninvasive 
approach. Ultimately, considering the very low cer -
tainty of evidence, the lack of clear associations with 
clinical benefit, and concerns regarding equity, patient 
comfort, and measurement discordance, the panel 
issued a conditional recommendation supporting 
the use of either noninvasive or invasive blood pres-
sure monitoring. However, several panel members felt 
strongly that measurement discordance should lead to 
a suggestion to use invasive monitoring. Regional vari-
ability in standards of care was also acknowledged.
“In our practice, ” most panel members (62.7%) use 
invasive blood pressure monitoring in patients with 
septic shock. Of the 37.3% that routinely treat adults 
with septic shock without invasive monitoring, nearly 
all (92.0%) measure noninvasive blood pressure at 
least every 15 minutes during early shock or with esca-
lating vasopressor doses (72.0% every 15 min, 20.0% 
more frequently); less frequent assessments are more 
common after the acute phase or with more stable 
vasopressor doses (28.0% every 15 min, 32.0% every 
30 min, 36.0% every 60 min). Further, only 28.0% have 
a specific vasopressor dose at which they routinely in-
itiate invasive monitoring (range: 0.1–0.5 µg/kg/min 
norepinephrine equivalents).
The multicenter EVERDAC RCT testing a nonin-
vasive strategy to blood pressure monitoring in cir -
culatory failure (i.e., avoidance of arterial line unless 
pre-specified safety criteria were met) was published 
after the 2026 SSC guideline recommendations were 
finalized (341). EVERDAC found that, among 1010 
patients randomized, 28-day all-cause mortality was 
noninferior in the noninvasive-strategy group (34.3% 
Prescott et al36     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4mortality vs. 36.9% in the invasive-strategy, p = 0.006 
for noninferiority) (341).
Fluid Type
43.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” using crystalloids as first-line 
fluid for resuscitation.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
44.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock 
undergoing initial resuscitation, we “sug-
gest” using balanced crystalloids over 0.9% 
saline.
(conditional recommendation, moderate cer-
tainty evidence)
Remark: For patients with sepsis and traumatic 
brain injury, we suggest using 0.9% saline.Revisited
45.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” using crystalloids alone over 
crystalloids with supplemental albumin for 
fluid resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation; moderate cer-
tainty evidence)
Remark: Use of supplemental albumin may be 
appropriate for patients who already received 
large crystalloid volumes or have cirrhosis. 
Supplemental albumin should be avoided in 
patients with traumatic brain injury.Revisited
46.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend against” using starches for 
resuscitation.
(strong recommendation, high-certainty 
evidence)Carryover
47 .  For adults with sepsis and septic shock, 
we “suggest against” using gelatin for 
resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation, moderate 
certainty evidence)Carryover
IV fluid administration is necessary for volume resus-
citation in sepsis and septic shock, although the op-
timal type of fluid has been debated. Carried over from 
the 2021 guidelines (65, 66), we recommend using 
crystalloids as first-line for fluid resuscitation and 
recommend against using starches. We also suggest 
against using gelatins. Please see 2021 guidelines for 
rationales regarding crystalloids as the first-line fluid 
over starches and gelatins (65, 66).
In this iteration of the guidelines, we re-evaluated 
whether to use balanced solutions, for example, lac-
tated Ringer’s solution, (vs. 0.9% saline) and albumin 
(vs. crystalloids). Although 0.9% saline remains the most widely used crystalloid (342), its use has been 
associated with hyperchloremic acidosis and acute 
kidney injury, leading to increased interest in balanced 
crystalloids due to their lower chloride content (342). 
The panel considered two recent reviews on use of bal-
anced solutions in general critical care patients with 
sepsis subgroups: one a systematic review and meta-
analysis that included 11 studies and 35,884 patients 
(343) and an individual patient data meta-analysis 
(IPDMA) derived from 5 high-quality RCTs and 6,753 
patients (344). The largest trials included in both the 
review and IPDMA were SMART (345) (15,802 total 
patients cluster-randomized in 1 center), BaSICS (346) 
(10,520 total patients individually randomized in 75 
centers), and PLUS (347) (5,037 total patients individ-
ually randomized in 53 centers).
The review showed that using balanced crystalloids 
probably reduced mortality compared with 0.9% sa-
line (OR 0.94; 95% CI, 0.85–1.04, moderate certainty) 
and new RRT (OR 0.86, 95% CI: 0.74–0.99, high cer -
tainty) and may have had no effect on VFD (MD 0.18 
higher; 95% CI, 0.45 lower to 0.81 higher, low certainty 
evidence). Several secondary analyses have suggested 
that the benefit of balanced solutions is greatest when 
used throughout resuscitation (348–350). The panel 
considered the balance of effects to probably favor 
balanced crystalloids with cost, and availability of bal-
anced solutions varying across settings, although non-
proprietary balanced solutions (e.g., Ringer’s lactate) 
are often similar in cost to 0.9% normal saline. The 
certainty of evidence has strengthened from the 2021 
guidelines due to added data.
Theoretically, albumin maintains intravascular 
oncotic pressure compared with crystalloids (351). 
Due to cost and the absence of clear benefit for its 
use, however, the 2021 guidelines provided a con-
ditional (previously, weak) recommendation for 
using albumin in patients who had already received 
large volumes of crystalloids. We identified five 
new systematic reviews (352–356), a clinical prac-
tice guideline from the International Collaboration 
of Transfusion Medicine (357), and two new ran-
domized controlled trials (358, 359) totaling an ad-
ditional 396 patients from published reports since 
2020. Our current recommendation relied on six 
RCTs of 4,383 patients with sepsis or septic shock, 
or their subgroups in larger trials (351, 358–362), 
including 3,013 (69%) from the ALBIOS (351) and 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     37SAFE (362) trials. We found probably no effect of al-
bumin on 28-day mortality (RR 1.01, 95%CI: 0.90–
1.14, moderate certainty). There was similarly no 
effect on 90-day mortality, new-onset organ dysfunc-
tion, ventilator or vasopressor-free days, and the re-
quirement for RRT. The panel considered the lack of 
proven benefit and higher cost of albumin in making 
this recommendation. The variability across trials 
in the albumin dose, concentration, and indication 
reduced evidence certainty due to inconsistency.
Considerations should be made for different pop-
ulations. For patients with traumatic brain injury, 
evidence suggests harm with the use of balanced 
crystalloids (363) or albumin (364), leading the panel 
to advise using 0.9% saline in this population. For 
patients with cirrhosis, use of albumin in addition to 
crystalloids may be preferred (365). Similarly, evidence 
suggesting higher blood pressures (351), higher static 
filling pressures (366), and lower net fluid balances 
(351) with albumin led the panel to propose albumin 
for patients who have already received large volumes 
of crystalloids. These recommendations for the use of 
balanced solutions and albumin concur with the 2024 
ESICM clinical practice guidelines (367).
Liberal Vs. Conservative Approach to 
Resuscitation
48.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock who 
have already received fluid resuscitation with 
30 mL/kg and have persistent hypoperfusion, 
we “suggest” using either a liberal or a 
restrictive fluid resuscitation strategy based 
on individual patient and health system 
factors.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: There was wide variability in the 
protocols used and the volume of fluids 
received in the liberal vs. restrictive arms 
across trials. Patient and health system factors 
to be considered include patients’ current 
clinical conditions and chronic illnesses 
(e.g., heart failure) and the availability of 
monitored beds (i.e., if a restrictive approach 
necessitates vasopressor use). Revisited 
Determining the optimal volume of fluid resuscita-
tion for patients with sepsis or septic shock is difficult. 
Restrictive and liberal approaches to ongoing resuscita-
tion have been evaluated in multiple trials (121, 368–372), 
but the studies vary widely with respect to definitions for restrictive and liberal strategies, eligibility criteria, set-
ting, timing, and duration of the interventions.
To inform our updated recommendations, we con-
sidered four RCTs (133, 371, 373, 374) that included 
3,320 patients with sepsis who had ongoing hypo-
perfusion or shock after initial fluid resuscitation. 
The pooled analysis demonstrated that a restrictive 
(compared with a liberal) approach to ongoing fluid 
management resulted in probably no difference in 
mortality (RR 1.00; 95% CI, 0.91–1.10, moderate cer -
tainty). Furthermore, there were probably no differ -
ences in VFD, (MD 0.14 d fewer, 95% CI, –2.11 to 1.83, 
low certainty), RRT (RR 0.99, 95% CI, 0.83–1.19, mod-
erate certainty), renal replacement-free days (MD 0.43 
d more, 95% CI, –0.59 to 1.45, moderate certainty), 
and vasopressor-free days (MD 0.49 d more, 95% CI, 
–0.37 to 1.35, moderate certainty).
The panel judged desirable and undesirable effects 
to be trivial. Costs of a restrictive approach (due to 
vasopressor use and requisite monitoring in certain 
settings) were considered potentially higher, with 
equity probably reduced. In addition, given differ -
ences in renal replacement free days and vasopressor 
requirements between approaches, the panel thought 
acceptability would vary across patients and clini-
cians. Taken together, these factors drove the decision 
to suggest either approach to ongoing fluid resuscita-
tion with advice that patient and health system factors 
be considered. In low resource settings (e.g., LMICs 
with limited access to invasive mechanical ventila-
tion), the potential harms associated with fluid over -
load are greater, providing support for a restrictive or 
more personalized approach to resuscitation (119).
The 2025 ESCIM clinical practice guidelines made 
no recommendation regarding liberal vs. restrictive 
approaches to fluid resuscitation, stating: “In adults 
with sepsis or septic shock who need fluid resuscita-
tion for circulatory failure, we cannot recommend for 
or against systematic restrictive or liberal fluid resusci-
tation” (123). In general, both the SSC statement and 
ESICM practice guidelines acknowledge the equiv-
alence between liberal and restrictive strategies and 
provide support for more personalized approaches to 
resuscitation, as discussed in the next statement. We 
chose to make a conditional “ether/or” recommenda-
tion rather than a statement of no recommendation 
based on our process for selecting type of statement 
(Fig. 1).
Prescott et al38     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4Fluid Resuscitation Guided by Dynamic 
Measures
49.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” using dynamic measures to guide 
fluid resuscitation over physical examination 
or static measures alone.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) 
Remark: Dynamic measures include response 
to a passive leg raise or a fluid bolus using 
stroke volume (SV), stroke volume variation 
(SVV), pulse pressure (PP), or pulse pressure 
variation (PPV). Revisited 
Patients with sepsis or septic shock often require ad-
ditional IV fluid following an initial 30 mL/kg fluid 
resuscitation. However, additional resuscitation fluid 
must be balanced against the risk of fluid accumula-
tion and potential harm associated with fluid overload, 
for example, prolonged mechanical ventilation, pro-
gression of acute kidney injury, and increased mor -
tality. As discussed in the prior statement, liberal and 
restrictive fluid strategies were judged to be equivalent 
based on the EtD summary of judgments.
To avoid over-resuscitation or under-resuscitation, 
fluid administration beyond the initial resuscitation 
phase should be guided by careful assessment of intra-
vascular volume status, organ perfusion, and fluid re-
sponsiveness. Heart rate, central venous pressure, and 
systolic blood pressure are poor indicators of whether 
a patient will benefit from additional IV fluid. Rather, 
dynamic measures better predict fluid responsiveness 
than static measures (375). Increases of 10–15% in the 
chosen parameter (e.g., stroke volume) following a 
fluid challenge or passive leg raise maneuver are reflec-
tive of fluid-responsiveness (375).
We identified 3 meta-analyses (375–377) examining 
the use of dynamic measures to guide fluid resuscita-
tion, with 18 total RCTs included across the three anal-
yses. The majority of RCTs were single-center studies 
with fewer than 100 patients. In a separate meta- 
analysis done for these SSC guidelines and inclusive 
of all 18 RCTs, fluid management guided by dynamic 
measures likely reduces mortality (18 RCTs; RR 0.91; 
95% CI, 0.79–1.06, moderate certainty, translating to 
28 fewer deaths per 1,000 patients; 95% CI, 65 fewer to 
19 more), likely results in a large reduction in need for 
RRT (6 trials, RR 0.75; 95% CI, 0.58–0.98, moderate 
certainty, translating to 71 fewer patients receiving RRT; 95% CI, 119 fewer to 6 fewer), and may result in a 
slight increase in ventilation-free days (MD 0.79 more 
days; 95% CI, 1.28 fewer days to 2.86 more days, very 
low certainty). In the only multicenter RCT focused on 
patients with sepsis-induced hypotension, fluid man-
agement guided by dynamic measures was associated 
with a lower net fluid balance at 72 h (MD –1.37L; 95% 
CI, –2.53L to –0.21L), lower receipt of RRT, and lower 
receipt of invasive mechanical ventilation (378).
Most data informing fluid resuscitation in sepsis 
originate from high resource settings, and there is lim-
ited evidence from low resource settings to guide ei-
ther the best fluid resuscitation approach or suitable 
safety endpoints. An RCT in patients with sepsis and 
hypotension in Zambia showed that early protocolized 
resuscitation with fluid administration guided by static 
measures and vital signs only (jugular venous pressure, 
respiratory rate, and arterial oxygen saturation), was 
associated with significantly more fluid administra-
tion in the first 6 h (median 3.5L vs. 2.0 L) and higher 
hospital mortality than standard care (48.1% vs. 33%) 
(121).
Point of care ultrasound (POCUS), noninvasive 
cardiac monitoring, and invasive cardiac monitor -
ing can be employed to measure stroke volume (SV). 
However, measurements of inferior vena cava diam-
eter or collapsibility principally reflect central venous 
pressure (CVP) and are subject to the same limitations 
as CVP measurement. A systematic review and meta-
analysis showed that use of POCUS-guided resusci-
tation probably reduces 28-day mortality (RR 0.88; 
95% CI, 0.78–0.99) (379). Although dynamic echo-
cardiographic estimation of SV and changes in this 
parameter can be useful, this modality requires tech-
nical expertise and experience that may not be readily 
available in low resource settings. Changes in pulse 
pressure in patients with clinical characteristics that 
permit valid interpretation (i.e., mechanically venti-
lated, without spontaneous respiration), although less 
accurate, may be particularly useful in low resource 
settings to assess fluid responsiveness in guiding re-
suscitation (156).
The SSC guideline suggestion to use dynamic meas-
ures to guide fluid resuscitation is consistent with the 
ESCIM clinical practice guideline recommendation: 
“In adults with sepsis or septic shock who require 
fluid resuscitation for circulatory failure, we suggest 
using an individualized approach compared with a 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     39non-individualized approach during the optimization 
phase” (123).
Cardiac Output Monitoring Devices
50.  For adults with septic shock, there is “insufficient 
evidence” to make a recommendation on using 
minimally invasive or noninvasive cardiac output 
monitoring in addition to usual care.
Remark: Minimally invasive cardiac output monitoring 
refers to devices requiring an arterial catheter. 
Noninvasive cardiac output monitoring refers to 
devices using bioreactance. Usual care refers to 
care without a pulmonary artery catheter. The use 
of critical care ultrasound was not evaluated. New 
Cardiac output has historically been measured by 
pulmonary artery catheterization (380–382), but this 
technique is invasive and lacks proven benefit in sepsis 
(383, 384). More recently, minimally-invasive (using a 
peripheral arterial catheter and pulse power or pulse 
wave analysis) and noninvasive (using surface sensors 
and pulse wave analysis, bioreactance, bioimpedance, 
or other techniques) monitors have been developed 
(385), which allow continuous assessment of cardiac 
output with potentially fewer risks than pulmonary ar -
tery catheterization (386).
Three RCTs (387–389) of 225 patients evaluated 
the use of minimally invasive cardiac output moni-
tors in septic shock, with pulse wave analysis used in 
all three. These studies demonstrate an uncertain effect 
on 28-day mortality (RR 0.92; 95% CI, 0.60–1.43, very 
low certainty evidence), a possible reduction in ICU 
LOS of (MD 2.09 d fewer; 95% CI, 0.85–3.34 d fewer, 
low certainty evidence) and invasive mechanical ven-
tilation duration (MD 1.42 d fewer; 95% CI, 0.43–2.4 
d fewer, low certainty evidence), but no information 
on potential adverse events related to the peripheral 
arterial catheters. Three RCTs (378, 390, 391) of 310 
patients assessed the impact of noninvasive cardiac 
output monitors in septic shock, all of which used bio-
reactance. Pooled analysis showed an uncertain effect 
on 28-day mortality (RR 0.77; 95% CI, 0.42–1.42, very 
low certainty evidence), ICU LOS (MD 1.03 d fewer; 
95% CI, 3.51 fewer to 1.45 more, very low certainty ev-
idence), hospital LOS (MD 0.74 d fewer; 95% CI, 1.73 
fewer to 0.15 more, low certainty evidence), and organ 
dysfunction (any: RR 1.11; 95% CI, 0.52–2.37 and 
acute kidney injury: RR 1.82; 95% CI, 0.51–1.32, both 
very low certainty evidence).The small number of patients evaluated in stud-
ies of both minimally invasive and noninvasive car -
diac output monitors led the panel to conclude there 
was insufficient evidence to issue a recommendation 
addressing their use. However, given the cost of these 
devices, concerns exist about their availability in low 
resource settings impacting equity.
We did not consider critical care ultrasound in our 
evidence synthesis. However, a recent SCCM guideline 
on critical care ultrasonography included conditional 
recommendations for use of critical care ultrasound in 
the management of adults with septic shock and to in-
form volume management in acutely ill adults (392).
“In our practice, ” 74.6% of panel members have 
minimally invasive (using an arterial catheter) car -
diac output monitors and 31.3% of panel members 
have noninvasive (bioreactance) monitors available 
at their hospital. Of those with availability, 24.0% of 
panel members use minimally invasive monitors and 
23.8% use noninvasive monitors in a majority (≥ 50%) 
of their patients with septic shock. The panel strongly 
encourages additional research into the efficacy, safety, 
and cost effectiveness of these newer modalities for 
cardiac output monitoring.
Serial Lactate Measurement
51.  For adults with sepsis and elevated lactate 
or septic shock, we “suggest” using serial 
lactate measurements to guide resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) 
Remark: Fluid administration should be 
individualized after initial fluid bolus and 
monitoring of lactate decrement, rather than 
continuing fluids until lactate normalization is 
achieved. Revisited 
Serum lactate is a critical biomarker for assessing tissue 
hypoxia and dysfunction, though it does not directly 
measure tissue perfusion (393). The Sepsis-3 defini-
tions explicitly include elevated lactate as a marker of 
cellular dysfunction alongside refractory hypotension, 
underscoring its role in identifying patients requiring 
urgent resuscitation (1).
Recent evidence has refined lactate-targeted resus-
citation strategies. Meta-analyses comparing lactate-
guided therapy with traditional approaches, such as 
early goal-directed therapy or central venous oxygen 
saturation-guided therapy, consistently show that 
Prescott et al40     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4lactate-guided therapy is associated with improved 
mortality and reduced organ dysfunction (394–398). 
For example, focusing on serial lactate measurements 
and clearance rates (e.g., ≥ 10% reduction every 2 hr) 
rather than static normalization has been associated 
with better clinical outcomes, including shorter ICU 
stays and lower severity scores (395). These findings 
highlight the importance of dynamic monitoring over 
single-timepoint measurements.
The panel emphasizes that clinicians consider lac-
tate trends with clinical assessment, such as hemo-
dynamics and organ perfusion. Fluid administration 
should be individualized after initial boluses, as exces-
sive fluids to normalize lactate may cause harm. Access 
to lactate testing may be limited in some low resource 
settings (179–183, 399–401). Although lactate-guided 
therapy demonstrates utility, variability in study 
designs and unclear optimal clearance thresholds con-
tribute to the conditional recommendation and low 
certainty of evidence (394–398). This conditional rec-
ommendation balances lactate’s value as a biomarker 
with the need for personalized, context-driven care, 
avoiding over-reliance on a single parameter in com-
plex clinical scenarios.
In low resource settings without access to lactate 
measurement, alternative approaches suggested by an 
expert Delphi panel include capillary refill time (CRT) 
and urinary output as guides to resuscitation (184).
Capillary Refill Time
52.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest” using capillary refill time to 
guide resuscitation as an adjunct to other 
measures of perfusion.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
CRT is a marker of peripheral tissue perfusion (402). It 
is one of the few bedside physical examination measure 
that may serve as both a triage and monitoring tool for 
resuscitation efforts in patients with sepsis or septic 
shock (403, 404). Although ambient lighting, temper -
ature, skin pigmentation, and peripheral vascular di-
sease must be considered during interpretation, CRT 
may be performed in various clinical settings (403, 
405).
Among critically ill patients, abnormal or prolonged 
CRT is associated with increased mortality, similar to other resuscitation targets such as lactate and MAP 
(406). However, MAP and lactate do not always cor -
relate with CRT for patients in shock, suggesting that 
CRT provides distinct hemodynamic information dur -
ing resuscitation (407, 408). In contrast to lactate, CRT 
can change quickly (e.g., within 10 min), allowing for 
more timely assessment of response to resuscitative 
interventions such as a fluid challenge or vasopressor 
administration (409).
We identified 2 RCTs in which 233 total patients 
were randomized to receive targeted resuscitation 
using CRT with the goal of normalizing CRT to less 
than or equal to 3 seconds or targeted resuscitation 
using lactate measured every 2 hours with a goal of nor -
malization or reduction by 20% (400, 410). The 28-day 
mortality risk ratio was 0.82 (95% CI, 0.65–1.04) with 
an absolute mortality reduction of 74 per 1000 deaths 
(95% CI, 144 fewer, 16 more). The remaining outcomes 
were assessed from the ANDROMEDA-SHOCK trial 
(400) for 90-day mortality and RRT with risk ratio 0.88 
(95% CI, 0.71–1.09) and 0.71 (95% CI, 0.47–1.10), and 
absolute risk reduction of 56 per 1000 deaths (95% CI, 
135–42) and 57 fewer RRT per 1000 (95% CI, 105–20), 
respectively. There were no statistically significant dif-
ferences in VFD, RRT-free days, or vasopressor-free 
days. A subsequent RCT suggested that stopping fluids 
in patients with CRT less than or equal to 3 seconds 
appeared safe without compromising tissue perfusion 
(410).
Although the small sample size, limited number 
of events, and wide CIs constrained the evidence to 
low certainty, the balance of effects probably favors 
use of CRT as part of a targeted resuscitation strategy. 
Although there are limited studies to assess resource 
utilization, and the ANDROMEDA-SHOCK trial 
(400) used a standardized approach requiring training, 
the panel determined that CRT is feasible, reproduc-
ible, and may be readily implemented in low resource 
settings in conjunction with other validated tools of 
resuscitation.
The multicenter ANDROMEDA-SHOCK-2 RCT 
(411, 412) testing a CRT-guided resuscitation protocol 
in patients with septic shock was published after evi-
dence synthesis and recommendations were finalized. 
In this trial, among 1467 patients included in the pri-
mary analysis, randomization to a personalized resus-
citation protocol targeting CRT was associated with 
better outcomes compared with usual care. Specifically, 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     41the win ratio for the hierarchical composite primary 
outcome of mortality, duration of vital support, and 
length of hospital stay at 28 days was 1.16 (95% CI, 
1.02–1.33, p = 0.04).
IV Vasopressors
53.  For adults with septic shock, we 
“recommend” using norepinephrine as the 
first-line agent over dopamine, epinephrine, 
or selepressin.
(strong recommendation)
Dopamine. High-certainty evidence
Epinephrine. Low certainty evidence
Selepressin. Low certainty evidence Carryover 
54.  For adults with septic shock, we “suggest 
against” using terlipressin.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)Carryover
55.  For adults with septic shock, we “suggest” 
using norepinephrine as the first-line agent 
over vasopressin or angiotensin II.
(conditional recommendation)
Vasopressin. Low certainty evidence.
Angiotensin II. Very low certainty evidence.Revisited
56.  For adults with septic shock on escalating 
doses of norepinephrine, we “suggest” add-
ing vasopressin.
(conditional recommendation, moderate cer-
tainty evidence)Revisited
57 .  For adults with septic shock and inadequate 
MAP levels despite norepinephrine and vas-
opressin, we “suggest” adding epinephrine.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: In settings where vasopressin is not 
available, epinephrine can be added to norep-
inephrine alone.Revisited
58.  For adults with septic shock with 
concomitant cardiac dysfunction, we 
“suggest” using either norepinephrine or 
epinephrine as first line vasopressor.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Norepinephrine may be preferred 
in patients with tachyarrhythmia or 
significant sinus tachycardia. Conversely, 
epinephrine may be preferred in patients 
with bradyarrhythmia or significant sinus 
bradycardia.New
Consistent with the 2021 SSC guidelines, the panel 
identified norepinephrine as the first-line vaso-
pressor for treatment of septic shock. Comparisons to dopamine, epinephrine, and selepressin were carried 
over; comparisons of norepinephrine (a catechola-
mine) to vasopressin (which directly induces vasocon-
striction via V1a receptors, stimulates V1b receptors 
in the anterior pituitary leading to adrenocorticotropic 
hormone secretion and subsequent cortisol produc-
tion (413), and attenuates endothelial-driven vasodila-
tion through purinergic and oxytocin receptors (413)) 
and angiotensin II (which induces vasoconstriction via 
angiotensin II type 1 receptors, stimulates aldosterone 
release, and enhances myocardial contractility) were 
reevaluated.
The panel identified two RCTs of 658 total patients 
randomized to vasopressin vs. norepinephrine as 
first-line vasopressor (414, 415). Meta-analysis found 
there was possibly no difference in mortality (RR 
1.07; 95% CI, 0.90–1.28, low certainty evidence), 
but probably less use of RRT (RR 0.70, CI 0.53–0.92, 
moderate certainty evidence) with vasopressin. 
Although evidence was low or very low certainty, vas-
opressin did not appear to result in differences in life-  
threatening arrhythmia or ischemia (digital,  
mesenteric, or myocardial).
The panel identified no RCTs comparing angio-
tensin II to norepinephrine as first-line therapy; two 
RCTs of 341 total patients already on norepinephrine 
who were randomized to the addition of angiotensin II 
vs. norepinephrine along were considered as indirect 
evidence (416, 417). Meta-analysis found that addition 
of angiotensin II may result in a reduction in mortality 
(RR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.69–1.06, low certainty evidence) 
but with an uncertain effect on ventricular arrythmias, 
ischemia (peripheral, intestinal, or myocardial), or 
deep vein thrombosis (all very low certainty evidence). 
As the balance of effects did not favor vasopressin 
or angiotensin II over norepinephrine (and the data 
on angiotensin II were indirect), the panel weighed 
strongly that vasopressin and angiotensin II tend to 
be more expensive and less available than norepineph-
rine, especially in low resource settings (418). In the 
low resource settings without access to norepineph-
rine, epinephrine has been recommended as an ac-
ceptable alternative by a Delphi panel of experts (184).
Consistent with the 2021 SSC guidelines (65, 66), the 
panel suggests sequentially adding vasopressin and then 
epinephrine for patients requiring escalating doses of nor -
epinephrine to maintain mean arterial blood pressure. To 
evaluate the addition of vasopressin in this context, we 
Prescott et al42     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4performed a meta-analysis of 9 RCTs (419–426) (1,439 
total patients, including 778 [54.1%] from the only mul-
ticenter trial, V ASST (419)). Meta-analysis found a prob-
able reduction in mortality with adding vasopressin 
compared with increasing norepinephrine alone (RR 
0.89; 95% CI, 0.79–1.01, moderate certainty). Although 
28-day mortality did not differ between groups in V ASST 
(vasopressin 35.4% vs. norepinephrine 39.3%, p  = 0.26), 
subgroup analyses suggested adding vasopressin may 
benefit patients in less severe shock (norepinephrine 
equivalent dose <15 µg/min; 28-day mortality 26.5% vs. 
35.7%, p = 0.05). Compared with norepinephrine mono-
therapy, adjunctive vasopressin probably results in less 
atrial fibrillation (RR 0.66; 95% CI, 0.42–1.05, moderate 
certainty evidence), but possibly more digital ischemia 
(RR 2.87; 95% CI, 0.84–9.82, low certainty). These find-
ings are consistent with published meta-analyses (427).
“In our practice, ” 85.1% of panel members add vas-
opressin in patients with septic shock on escalating 
doses of norepinephrine. Panelists using vasopressin 
initiate it at a median dose of 0.3 μg/kg/min of nor -
epinephrine (IQR 0.2–0.5 μg/kg/min). This dosing is 
similar to a recent observational study in which a re-
inforcement machine learning model suggested ini-
tiating vasopressin at a median 0.20 μg/kg/min (IQR 
0.08–0.45 μg/kg/min), as compared with clinician ini-
tiation of vasopressin at a median 0.37 μg/kg/min (IQR 
0.17–0.69 μg/kg/min) (428).
The panel relied on an indirect estimate from a pub-
lished network metanalysis (429) (31 RCTs with 5928 
patients and 11 comparators) to evaluate the addition 
of epinephrine vs. escalating norepinephrine. Results 
found an uncertain effect on mortality of combined 
epinephrine and norepinephrine over norepinephrine 
alone (OR 0.65; 95% CI, 0.19–2.18, very low certainty 
evidence), but no data were available for the addition of 
epinephrine to both norepinephrine and vasopressin. 
There was also an uncertain effect on arrhythmias (OR 
1.68; 95% CI, 0.05–60.10, very low certainty evidence). 
The panel’s suggestion was driven by the possible mor -
tality benefits of adding vasopressin and epinephrine, 
in order, rather than continuing to escalate norepi-
nephrine. Given the widespread availability and safety 
profile of epinephrine, however, we suggested adding 
epinephrine to norepinephrine alone in settings where 
vasopressin is not available.
“In our practice, ” 55.2% of panel members add ep-
inephrine in patients with septic shock on escalating doses of norepinephrine. Panelists using epinephrine 
initiate it at a median dose of 0.8 μg/kg/min of norepi-
nephrine (IQR 0.5–1.0 μg/kg/min).
Despite the potential theoretical benefits of adding 
a vasopressor with a completely different mechanism 
of action, a PICO question examining second or third-
line use of angiotensin II was not prioritized. We did, 
however, examine trials on the addition of angiotensin 
II as indirect evidence for the PICO question on first-
line vasopressor selection, as discussed above.
Overall, given the high mortality of septic shock and 
low certainty of evidence informing practice, there is 
a need for further studies to inform vasopressor se-
lection and titration. Specifically, further study is 
needed to confirm whether adding vasopressin and 
epinephrine improves outcomes, to address the timing 
of adjunctive vasopressor initiation (at what norepi-
nephrine dose and when in the septic shock course), 
to address the benefits of multimodal vasopressor 
strategies, and to identify potential subgroups un-
derlying heterogeneity of treatment effect. There are 
ongoing clinical trials to assess first-line vasopressor 
selection (NCT02118467) and initiation of vasopressin 
(NCT06217562; NCT06464510).
Although both norepinephrine and epinephrine are 
catecholamines, their pharmacological profiles and 
clinical effects differ (430). Norepinephrine acts pre-
dominantly on alpha-1 receptors, producing strong 
vasoconstriction. It has mild beta-1 activity providing 
limited inotropic support without affecting heart rate or 
myocardial oxygen demand (430). Epinephrine, in con-
trast, exerts potent beta-1, beta-2, and alpha-1 receptor 
stimulation resulting in combined vasoconstriction 
and robust inotropic and chronotropic effects. For this 
reason, epinephrine may benefit patients with septic 
shock and concomitant cardiac dysfunction. However, 
epinephrine’s benefits may be offset by drawbacks in-
cluding tachyarrhythmias, increased myocardial oxygen 
consumption, and a rise in serum lactate—complicating 
lactate use as a perfusion biomarker (430).
The panel Identified no trials evaluating patients 
with septic shock and concurrent cardiac dysfunction. 
We Identified one randomized trial (the CAT Study 
(431)) of 280 patients, 158 with sepsis, which found 
epinephrine as compared with norepinephrine had an 
uncertain effect on mortality (HR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.53–
1.32, very low certainty) (431), consistent with the indi-
rect effect from a network metanalysis (33 RCTs, 3470 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     43patients, 16 different comparators; OR for norepineph-
rine vs. epinephrine 1.35; 95% CI, 0.71—2.56) (432). 
In the CAT study, there was possibly no difference in 
vasopressor-free days (epinephrine median 26.3, IQR 
17.2–27.3 vs. norepinephrine 24.2, 7.7–26.5, p = 0.13, 
low certainty) and indirect evidence suggests epineph-
rine may increase tachyarrhythmias and lactic acidosis 
(431, 433). In this context, the panel did not favor ep-
inephrine over norepinephrine—or vice versa—for 
adults with septic shock requiring vasopressors in the 
setting of concomitant cardiac dysfunction.
Methylene Blue
59.  For adults with refractory septic shock 
and escalating vasopressor requirements, 
there is “insufficient evidence” to make a 
recommendation on IV methylene blue.
Remark: Although methylene blue may improve 
blood pressure, there is insufficient evidence to 
determine if its use as rescue therapy improves 
survival; some patients with potentially treatable 
disease may value a trial.
Remark: “In our practice, ” 69% of panelists “never” 
or “almost never” use methylene blue as rescue 
therapy, 23% “sometimes” use it, 6%’usually’ use 
it, and 1.5% “almost always” use it. New 
Methylene blue is a phenothiazine derivative that is 
standardly used for treatment of methemoglobinemia 
at doses of 1.0–2.0 mg/kg over 5–30 minutes, which 
can be repeated one hour later if symptoms persist. 
Methylene blue has also been used and studied as a 
rescue therapy in septic shock due its ability to im-
prove vascular tone through inhibition of endothelial 
and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and down-
stream inhibition of soluble guanylate cyclase (434).
We updated an existing systematic review of six 
RCTs (434), identifying two additional small RCTs 
(435, 436), comparing IV methylene blue to usual 
care or placebo in patients with septic shock. Dosing 
regimens of methylene blue in these RCTs varied (e.g., 
one-time infusion of 0.5–2.0 mg/kg; 100 mg every 6 hr; 
2.0 mg/kg followed by 0.25–2.0 mg/kg daily or hourly). 
Although there is very low certainty evidence for its 
impact upon mortality (RR 0.79; 95% CI, 0.60–1.03, 
very low certainty), methylene blue likely results in a 
reduction in duration of vasopressors (MD –1 d; 95% 
CI, –1.8 to –0.20, moderate certainty). Certainty of ev-
idence for other outcomes, such as duration of venti-
lation and LOS is low. Although studies of other iNOS inhibitors have demonstrated increased mortality 
(437), the largest study of methylene blue included 
only 90 patients and had no longer-term mortality data 
(438). Values and preferences would play an important 
role in choosing whether to use IV methylene blue as a 
rescue therapy in refractory septic shock, given the lack 
of evidence regarding longer-term mortality and func-
tional outcomes, which may be quite poor in this very 
sick population. The role of shared decision-making 
was supported by the patient panel.
Methylene blue may be more acceptable to patients 
with otherwise potentially survivable illness and re-
covery to a patient-acceptable quality of life; in mor -
ibund patients for whom longer-term survival or an 
acceptable quality of life are unlikely, it is less likely to 
be acceptable. The panel thus made a conditional rec-
ommendation for either using or not using IV meth-
ylene blue in refractory septic shock. Lastly, the panel 
noted that in some low resource settings where other 
vasopressor treatments are unavailable (e.g., countries 
without access to vasopressin), methylene blue may 
represent the only viable second-line treatment option 
for refractory septic shock and thus may be used as a 
rescue therapy earlier in resuscitation. “In our practice, ” 
69% of panelists “never” or “almost never” use meth-
ylene blue as rescue therapy, 23% “sometimes” use it, 
6%’usually’ use it, and 1.5% “almost always” use it.
Inotropes
60.  For adults with septic shock and cardiac 
dysfunction with persistent hypoperfusion 
despite adequate fluid status and arterial 
blood pressure, we “suggest” using 
inotropes over no inotropes.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: For patients requiring vasopressors 
to maintain mean arterial pressure at target, 
inotropes should be used in addition to (not 
instead of) vasopressors. Revisit 
61.  For adults with septic shock with persis-
tent hypoperfusion and cardiac dysfunction 
despite adequate fluid resuscitation and 
arterial blood pressure, we “suggest” adding 
dobutamine to norepinephrine or using epi-
nephrine alone.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Data were insufficient to make a recom-
mendation for dobutamine vs. milrinone.Revisit
Prescott et al44     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 462.  For adults with septic shock and cardiac 
dysfunction with persistent hypoperfusion 
despite adequate volume status and arterial 
blood pressure, we “suggest against” using 
levosimendan.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)Carryover
Sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction is common among 
patients with septic shock and may contribute to wors-
ened clinical outcomes (439). Cardiac dysfunction 
should be suspected following evaluation with bed-
side echocardiography (440) or cardiac output moni-
toring devices. After adequate fluid resuscitation and 
restoration of arterial blood pressure, inotropes may 
be beneficial for patients with cardiac dysfunction 
and persistent hypoperfusion. In patients with septic 
shock, dobutamine has been shown to increase oxygen 
delivery, improve intramucosal acidosis, reduce lac-
tate levels, and enhance microcirculatory recruitment 
(441). Although the physiologic rationale for using 
inotropes in patients with cardiac dysfunction is intui-
tive, there are potential harms from excessive vasodila-
tion and tachycardia (441). Importantly, no RCTs have 
directly assessed the balance between these potential 
benefits and harms in this population.
A network meta-analysis (432) including 33 trials 
with 3,470 patients across 16 different comparators 
suggested that, in an indirect comparison between 
norepinephrine alone and norepinephrine plus dobu-
tamine, dobutamine had an uncertain effect on mor -
tality (OR 0.69; 95% CI, 0.32–1.47, very low-certainty 
evidence). Considering the intuitive physiologic 
effects, potential benefits from the network meta- 
analysis, feasibility, acceptability, and negligible cost, 
with probably no impact on equity, the panel issued a 
conditional recommendation in favor of using inotro-
pes in patients with septic shock and signs of cardiac 
dysfunction who are considered, otherwise, adequately 
resuscitated. However, given the potential harms from 
vasodilation and hypotension, inotropes such as dobu-
tamine should be used in addition to (not as a replace-
ment for) vasopressors.
Several inotropes exist. Dobutamine and epi-
nephrine are commonly used inotropes, yet no high- 
quality evidence supports the superiority of one over 
the other. A single randomized, double-blind trial 
involving 330 patients across 19F ICUs compared ep-
inephrine vs. norepinephrine plus dobutamine and found no difference in 90-day mortality (RR 0.96; 95% 
CI, 0.78–1.19, low certainty evidence), ICU LOS, or 
vasopressor-free days. The incidence of life-threatening  
arrhythmia was similar in both groups. Therefore, con-
sistent with the 2021 SSC guidelines, the panel consid-
ered the desirable and undesirable consequences to be 
comparable for both drugs and, with both being ac-
ceptable and feasible, issued a recommendation to use 
either agent for patients with septic shock and cardiac 
dysfunction with persistent hypoperfusion despite ad-
equate fluid status and arterial blood pressure. Notably, 
epinephrine is widely available in low resource settings, 
enhancing feasibility. Milrinone, a phosphodiesterase-3  
inhibitor, may improve cardiac function (442). 
However, the panel judged the current evidence insuf-
ficient to issue a recommendation for dobutamine vs. 
milrinone. The recommendation against using levosi-
mendan is carried over from the 2021 SSC guidelines.
“In our practice, ” 94.0% of the panel uses inotropes 
in adults with septic shock with persistent hypoperfu-
sion and cardiac dysfunction despite adequate fluid 
resuscitation and arterial blood pressure. Of these, 
31.8% use inotropes often, 44.4% sometimes, and 
23.8% rarely. Most of the panel (71.4%) use dobuta-
mine, whereas 12.7% use milrinone, 14.3% uses epi-
nephrine, and none of the panelists use levosimendan. 
The factors that drive panel members’ choice of ino-
tropes include details of cardiac dysfunction (31.7%); 
heart rate/arrhythmias (27.0%); renal failure (7.9%), 
and pulmonary hypertension (7.9%).
Given the high prevalence of cardiac dysfunction 
in sepsis, this area remains a research priority. Trials 
are urgently needed to assess the impact of inotropes 
in sepsis, define which patients benefit, and deter -
mine optimal timing, dosing, and weaning strategies. 
Ongoing trials (e.g., NCT04166331) are expected to 
inform future practice.
Midodrine
63.  For adults with septic shock and ongoing 
requirement for vasopressors, there 
is “insufficient evidence” to make a 
recommendation on use of oral midodrine. New 
Need for IV vasopressors is a common indication 
for ICU admission, while ongoing need for low-dose 
vasopressors may delay transfer out of the ICU when 
clinical status is otherwise improving (443, 444). IV 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     45vasopressors are associated with adverse events and 
traditionally require central venous access (445). 
Midodrine, an oral medication with alpha-agonist 
properties, has some evidence of benefit in orthostatic 
(446) and intradialytic hypotension (447) and there-
fore may have utility as a vasopressor-sparing agent.
The most comprehensive meta-analysis address-
ing this question in vasodilatory shock was recently 
published and included 7 small RCTs (448). The panel 
considered this review, with specific focus on the 
septic shock subgroup which was informed by 4 small 
RCTs including 180 patients. Pooled analysis from 
those with septic shock demonstrated an uncertain 
effect of midodrine on mortality, RRT, acute kidney in-
jury, and acute hepatic failure (all very low certainty). 
Midodrine may increase vasopressor-free days (MD 
0.98 d more; 95% CI, 1.28 fewer to 3.24 more, low cer -
tainty evidence) and reduce hospital LOS (MD 0.73 d 
fewer; 95% CI, 5.00 fewer to 3.54 more, low certainty 
evidence) and ICU LOS (MD 0.8 d fewer; 95% CI, 1.83 
fewer to 0.23 more, low certainty).
The panel judged desirable effects to be trivial with 
LOS Impacts being Important but uncertain, while 
undesirable effects were unknown given the lack 
of reporting among included studies. Although the 
drug is cheap in most jurisdictions, there were con-
cerns about availability in low resource settings and 
the potential impact on equity. Safety and the ability 
to reliably maintain target blood pressure were also 
concerns. Finally, the panel worried that while mido-
drine may be acceptable in post-resuscitation shock, 
it is perhaps less so in the acute phase, earlier shock 
management.
“In our practice, ” 32.8% of panel members use 
midodrine in adults with septic shock. Among 
those who use midodrine, 86.4% use it after the 
acute phase of septic shock to facilitate discontinu-
ation of IV vasopressors whereas 9.1% use it in the 
early acute phase of mild septic shock to avoid ini-
tiating IV vasopressors. Panel members consider its 
use for patients with prolonged low-dose IV vaso-
pressor requirements who have otherwise clinically 
improved, patients with chronic renal failure, and 
patients with cirrhosis.
Ultimately, the panel decided there was insufficient 
evidence to make a recommendation but felt this ques-
tion must be a future research priority given the prom-
ising, but non-definitive results from phase II RCTs.Beta-Blockers
64.  For adults with septic shock, we “suggest 
against” using beta-blockers as a treatment for 
septic shock.
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: This recommendation is based on evidence 
for short-acting, IV beta-blockers (esmolol and 
landiolol) prescribed for treatment of septic shock. New 
Although the use of beta-blockers in septic shock 
may seem counterintuitive, pre-clinical data suggests 
it may improve outcomes (448). The exact mech-
anism remains unclear, however it may be related to 
decreased myocardial workload and optimized myo-
cardial energy efficiency (449). Despite promising an-
imal studies, the RCT data addressing this question 
have produced variable results (450–452).
The panel considered the most comprehensive 
meta-analysis (453) addressing this question which 
was recently published and included 12 RCTs and 1170 
patients. Pooled analysis demonstrated an uncertain 
effect of beta-blockers on mortality (RR 0.76; 95% CI, 
0.62–0.93, very low certainty), bradycardia (RR 3.14; 
95% CI, 0.91–10.82, very low certainty), ICU LOS (MD 
0.75 d fewer; 95% CI, 3.43 fewer to 1.93 more, very 
low certainty), and hospital LOS (MD 1.03 d more; 
95% CI, 1.92 fewer to 3.98 more, very low certainty). 
Beta-blockers were probably associated with a reduc-
tion in new onset tachyarrhythmias (RR 0.37; 95% CI, 
0.18–1.78, moderate certainty), but also probably as-
sociated with an increased duration of vasopressor use 
(MD 1.04 d more; 95% CI, 0.37–1.72 d more, moderate 
certainty).
The panel judged both desirable and undesirable 
effects to be trivial and given moderate costs associ-
ated with IV beta-blockers, variability in their avail-
ability (especially of shorter-acting beta-blockers), 
and the potential impact on health equity, decided a 
conditional recommendation against this interven-
tion was most appropriate. Also factoring into the 
panel decision was the very low certainty evidence for 
most outcomes of interest, including mortality and 
LOS, and an evidence summary informed by mostly 
small, single-center RCTs. The role of beta blockers in 
sepsis—including the optimal timing of administra-
tion, agent selection, and identification of subgroups 
most likely to benefit—is a key research priority. Given 
Prescott et al46     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4the promising but preliminary findings from phase 
II RCTs, a large, multicenter RCT assessing patient-
important outcomes is warranted to address these crit-
ical questions.
RESPIRATORY SUPPORT
Monitoring of Hypoxemia
65.  For adults with sepsis, we “suggest” measuring 
oxygenation by either pulse oximeter (Sp o2) or 
arterial blood gas (Sa o2) in conjunction with 
physical examination and clinical acumen.
 (conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remarks: Arterial blood gas measurements are 
the gold standard for assessing oxygenation; 
include other important information such as 
pH, Pa co2, lactate, and bicarbonate; and are 
preferable when available. Sp o2/Fio2 by pulse 
oximeter may substitute for Pa o2/Fio2 ratio, but 
is less accurate in patients in shock, with darker 
skin tones, and/or with oxygen saturations < 
90% or > 97%. New 
Arterial blood gas (ABG) measurement is the gold 
standard for assessing oxygenation, but is invasive, 
costly, and not available in all settings. Pulse oximetry 
is noninvasive, more universally available, and can 
provide continuous monitoring that is easy to inter -
pret, though its accuracy is reduced in low perfusion 
states. Measurement of the ratio of arterial oxygen ten-
sion (Pao2) to F io2 (Fio2) is required for the hypox-
emia criterion for the diagnosis of acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS). However, a growing body 
of evidence also supports the use of the ratio of pulse 
oximetry-based measurements such as oxygen satura-
tion (Spo2) to F io2 for the clinical diagnosis and man-
agement of ARDS.
Our recommendation is in part based on a sys-
tematic review of 45 observational studies, 30 of 
which were in adult patients with acute respiratory 
failure, that examined the accuracy of substituting 
an Sp o2/Fio2 ratio for a Pao2/Fio2 ratio and found 
the Spearman correlation co-efficient ranged be-
tween 0.5 and 0.8 (454). Furthermore, the Pao2/Fio2 
ratio could most often be derived using a simple 
linear equation first described by Rice and col-
leagues (455). However, the correlation is less ac-
curate when oxygen saturations are less than 90% 
or greater than 97% (related to the shape of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve). In addition, 
a large single-center study in adult patients in the 
United States comparing 48,097 paired oxygenation 
values by pulse oximetry and ABG, showed that 
Black patients had nearly three times the frequency 
of occult hypoxemia compared with White patients 
that was not detected by pulse oximetry (456). A 
systematic review that examined accuracy of ar -
terial oxygenation by pulse oximetry including 44 
studies, reported an overestimation of arterial ox-
ygen saturation (Sao2) by pulse oximetry in patients 
with darker skin tones (457). The lower the Sao2, the 
greater the degree of overestimation bias. However, 
different pulse oximeters models were used in the 
included studies and participants’ skin tones were 
not measured objectively.
Based on this evidence, the panel issued a condi-
tional recommendation for measuring oxygenation ei-
ther using pulse oximetry (Spo2) or arterial blood gas 
(Sao2) in conjunction with physical examination and 
clinical acumen. However, the panel cautioned against 
using pulse oximetry for oxygenation measurements 
in patients in shock, with darker skin tones, and/or ox-
ygen saturations less than 90% or greater than 97 % 
due to its inaccuracies and emphasized that ABG mea-
surements are the gold standard for assessing oxygena-
tion and are preferred when available.
The new global consensus definition of ARDS allows 
for the use of pulse oximetry-based measurements for 
the diagnosis of ARDS (458). The use of Spo2/Fio2less 
than 315 (if Spo2 < 97%) has been suggested for use in 
low resource settings when an ABG is unavailable, as 
an alternative to Pao2/Fio2 for the diagnosis of ARDS 
(mild) in non-intubated patients with ARDS and to cat-
egorize the severity in intubated patients with ARDS. 
Clinicians should exercise caution substituting a S/F 
ratio for a P/F ratio for patients in shock, with darker 
skin tones and with oxygen saturations less than 90% 
or greater than 97%. In the future, ARDS definitions 
may go beyond these syndromic concepts in favor of 
treatable traits (459).
The increasing recognition of diagnostic inac-
curacy should also spur further clinical research in 
this space with consideration of the development of 
pulse oximeters that can overcome these inaccura-
cies. However, until such time, improving equity 
in routine ABG testing is paramount to mitigate 
occult hypoxemia.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     47Oxygen Targets
66.  For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic 
respiratory failure, we “suggest” titrating F io2 to 
target either higher, more liberal oxygen levels or 
lower, conservative oxygen levels depending on 
patient factors and resource limitations.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence)
Remark: Although there was variability across trials 
informing this recommendation, most used a lower 
target of approximately 90–93% Sp o2 and a 
higher target of Sp o2 ≥96.
Remark: “In our practice”, panelists target Sp o2 
between 90% (IQR 90–92%) to 96% (IQR 
94–98%) for patients with sepsis and acute 
hypoxemic respiratory failure. New 
This recommendation is based on 10 RCTs (24,022 
patients) reporting 28-day or 90-day mortality (460–
469). Meta-analysis of these trials demonstrated that 
lower, conservative oxygen targets may result in little 
to no difference in short-term mortality (RR 1.02; 
95% CI, 0.99–1.05, translating to 7 more deaths per 
1,000 patients, 95% CI, 4 fewer to 18 more, low cer -
tainty). There may also be little to no difference in 
duration of mechanical ventilation (0.29 more days, 
95% CI, 0.76 fewer to 1.34 more, low certainty) or me-
chanical ventilation free days (1.7 fewer with lower 
oxygen targets 95% CI, 5.88 fewer to 2.48 more, low 
certainty) but these estimates were each based on one 
trial (466, 470). Given the trivial effect size for crit-
ical outcomes with lower vs. higher oxygen targets, 
lower oxygen targets may result in little to no differ -
ence in mortality or other outcomes at the individual 
level. However, given the large number of patients 
with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, a 
small effect size might still have an important popula-
tion impact. However, in low resource settings where 
oxygen therapy or mechanical ventilators are limited, 
titrating to lower oxygen targets may be more benefi-
cial overall.
Although the higher, liberal oxygen targets in in-
cluded trials were similar (generally Spo2 ≥96%), the 
lower, conservative oxygen targets varied considerably. 
Intermediate oxygen targets (Spo2 94–95%) were not 
addressed with this analysis, since few trials targeted 
this range. However, one trial (469) found no differ -
ence in ventilator free days at 28 days with intermediate 
vs. higher oxygen targets (median ventilator-free days 
[VFD] 21 d [IQR 0–25] vs. 21 d [IQR 0–26]). The ev-
idence did not provide guidance on whether a precise target within the higher oxygen target range (e.g., 
96–97% vs. 98–100%) is optimal. However, the panel 
determined that it is reasonable to target the lower end 
of the liberal oxygen target range (Spo2 96–97%) or in-
termediate oxygen targets (Spo2 94–95%) even when 
resources are not limited.
This recommendation differs from a recent rapid 
practice guideline (471) that suggested against the rou-
tine use of higher oxygen targets. In contrast to the 
rapid practice guideline, we excluded trials that spe-
cifically targeted patients without sepsis, for example, 
trials focused on patients with acute exacerbation of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), car -
diac arrest, stroke, or other acute neurologic injury. In 
addition, the SSC guidelines analysis included more 
recently published trials (464, 465, 468). A further 
analysis done to support this guideline, updating a pre-
vious Cochrane meta-analysis (472), revealed no effect 
on mortality (RR 1.0 for mortality, 95% CI, 0.95–1.04, 
low certainty) when including all trials regardless of 
focus on sepsis or not.
The panel acknowledged some patients may benefit 
from lower oxygen targets while others may benefit 
from higher oxygen targets. Indeed, possible hetero-
geneity of treatment effect was identified in an indi-
vidualized treatment effect analysis, where sepsis was 
associated with benefit from higher oxygen targets 
(473). However, this was a retrospective analysis in-
cluding a limited number of patients with sepsis (473). 
The results from the MEGA-ROX trial which aims to 
enroll 40,000 patients will lend greater confidence to 
any estimate and provide another opportunity to assess 
for heterogeneity of treatment effect for oxygen targets 
among patients with sepsis (NCT04092468).
“In our practice, ” panelists target Spo2 between 90% 
(IQR 90–92%) and 96% (IQR 94–98%) for patients 
with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure.
Noninvasive Respiratory Support
67 .  For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic 
respiratory failure, we “suggest” using high flow 
nasal cannula (HFNC) therapy over conventional 
oxygen therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: This recommendation pertains to patients 
with a Pa o2/Fio2 ratio <200 or Sp o2/Fio2 ratio 
<235. New 
Prescott et al48     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 468. For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic res-
piratory failure, we “suggest” using HFNC as the 
initial therapy over noninvasive positive pressure 
ventilation.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)New
69. For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic 
respiratory failure, we “suggest” using HFNC over 
high flow alternating with noninvasive positive 
pressure ventilation.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)New
Conventional, low-flow oxygen therapy is commonly 
administered for treatment of hypoxemia. However, it 
cannot deliver a F io2 exceeding 0.6–0.7 in the upper 
airways, even with a non-rebreathing facemask, and 
is limited by flow rates of less than or equal to 15 L/
min. Alternatively, high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) 
can achieve F io2 exceeding 0.8–0.9 and deliver flow 
rates up to 60 L/min of humidified gas, reducing work 
of breathing by mitigating the effect of anatomic dead 
space and potentially achieving low levels of positive 
airway pressure.
Patients with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respira-
tory failure might benefit from noninvasive positive 
pressure ventilation (NIPPV) to avoid intubation, 
invasive ventilation, and associated complications. 
However, HFNC oxygen therapy is easier to apply, 
generally more comfortable for the patient, allows for 
eating and speaking, and avoids various complications 
of NIPPV including increased risk of gastric insuffla-
tion, aspiration, and damage to facial skin.
The evidence for suggesting HFNC over conven-
tional oxygen therapy is based on 11 RCTs (3546 
patients) and applies to patients with a Pao2/Fio2 ratio 
less than 200 or an Spo2/Fio2 ratio less than 235 (474–
484). The evidence for suggesting HFNC over NIPPV 
is based on 7 RCTs (2465 patients) (480, 485–490). This 
evidence for suggesting HFNC over alternating HFNC 
and NIPPV is based on two RCTs (515 patients) (474, 
491). The main causes of acute respiratory failure in 
the included trials were infections and included trials 
focused on COVID-19 and respiratory failure in im-
munosuppressed patients. Trials focusing on patients 
with cardiogenic pulmonary edema or acute exacerba-
tion of COPD were excluded.
In meta-analysis, HFNC therapy resulted in an 
uncertain but potential reduction in mortality (RR 
0.90; 95% CI, 0.74–1.10, very low certainty); trivial reduction in hospital LOS (0.57 d; 95% CI, 1.52 fewer 
to 0.37 more, moderate certainty); (475, 477–480, 483, 
484); and uncertain but potential increase in VFDs 
(2.93 d more; 95% CI, 0.39 more to 5.47 more, very 
low certainty), as compared with conventional oxygen 
therapy (474, 477, 479, 484). HFNC had an uncertain 
but possible reduction in need for intubation (RR 0.88; 
95% CI, 0.77–1.00, very low certainty). With excep-
tion of hospital LOS (moderate certainty evidence), all 
other outcomes (mortality, VFD, and need for intuba-
tion) were graded as very low certainty evidence, and 
all were down-graded for imprecision. Data on severe 
adverse events (RR with HFNC 0.47 (95% CI, 0.22–
1.02, low certainty evidence) were also limited by im-
precision. Subgroup analysis in two studies indicated 
that the incidence of intubation was lower in patients 
with a Pao2/Fio2 less than or equal to 200 mm Hg or 
Fio2 greater than 0.6 (474, 480).
In meta-analysis, HFNC was associated with a pos-
sible decrease in mortality (RR 0.89; 95% CI, 0.74–1.08, 
low certainty) (480, 485–490) and shorter duration of 
mechanical ventilation (MD 1.00 d fewer, 95% CI, 1.04 
fewer to 0.95 fewer, moderate certainty), as compared 
with NIPPV (480, 490). There was no effect on hos-
pital LOS (0.19 d more; 95% CI, 0.45 fewer to 0.83 
more, high certainty) (480, 485, 486, 488–490), an un-
certain effect on ventilation-free days at 28 d (0.67 d 
fewer (95% CI, 1.43 fewer to 0.09 more, very low cer -
tainty) (485, 486, 488, 489), and probably no important 
effect on the rate of adverse events (7 more per 1000 
patients for pneumonia (varied definitions), 95% CI, 4 
fewer to 25 more, moderate certainty) (486, 489) and 2 
more per 1000 patients for cardiac arrest (9 fewer to 23 
more, moderate certainty) (489).
In meta-analysis, HFNC had an uncertain effect on 
mortality (RR 0.69, 95% CI, 0.30–1.58, very low cer -
tainty) (474, 491), as compared with alternating HFNC 
and NIPPV . HFNC was associated with shorter hospital 
LOS (MD 2 d fewer, 95% CI, 5.3 fewer to 1.3 more, low 
certainty) (491) and more ventilator free days (MD 4 d 
more; 95% CI, 1.65 more to 6.35 more, low certainty) 
as compared with alternating therapy (474, 491).
The impact on mortality and duration of mechanical 
ventilation drove the suggestion of HFNC over conven-
tional oxygen and NIPPV . Furthermore, HFNC appears 
safe and may be better tolerated than NIPPV . Indeed, 
in the FLORALI trial, respiratory discomfort (as meas-
ured by visual analog scale) was lower with HFNC, as 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     49compared with NIPPV alternating with HFNC (474). 
The panel considered that HFNC probably costs more 
than conventional oxygen therapy due to requiring 
more disposables and oxygen, but that shorter duration 
of mechanical ventilation might result in an important 
cost reduction. Both HFNC and NIPPV require dis-
posables, with alternating HFNC and NIPPV requiring 
even more. We did not identify any direct data analyz-
ing cost effectiveness. Although stakeholders are likely 
to find HFNC acceptable in places where it is available, 
incorporation of HFNC into care pathways for patients 
with sepsis and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure 
should be weighed against available oxygen supply. 
Given its higher oxygen consumption relative to low-
flow oxygen therapy modalities (492), HFNC oxygen 
therapy might reduce the available oxygen supply and 
limit the number of patients who could be treated with 
supplemental oxygen therapy. In low resource settings 
without HFNC, NIPPV has been suggested as reason-
able alternative by an expert Delphi panel (184).
Awake Proning
70.  For adults with sepsis and acute hypoxemic 
respiratory failure who are not intubated, we 
“suggest” a trial of awake proning.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remarks: The duration and frequency of proning will 
depend on patient tolerance. Sedation should not 
be used for the purposes of promoting tolerance 
of proning in non-intubated patients. New 
Awake self-proning has been proposed as a method to 
improve oxygenation, reduce work of breathing, opti-
mize ventilation perfusion matching, and potentially 
reduce risk of further lung injury among patients with 
acute hypoxic respiratory failure (493).
We identified 17 RCTs (3537 patients) to inform 
this recommendation (100, 494–509). Awake pron-
ing may result in a slight reduction in the requirement 
for intubation (RR 0.82, 95% CI, 0.73–0.93, low cer -
tainty) (494–500, 503–505, 507, 509). Meta-analysis 
yielded uncertain results for most other outcomes 
due to indirectness (as all trials focused on patients 
with COVID-19) and imprecision. However, point 
estimates suggested that awake proning may result in 
reduced mortality at 14 days (RR 0.89; 95% CI, 0.64–
1.24, very low certainty) (495, 497, 498, 502, 503, 505–
509), increased hospital-free days (MD 3.6 d more, 95% CI, 0.95 fewer to 8.15 more, very low certainty) 
(494), and increased VFD (MD 0.78 d more, 95% CI, 
1.28 d fewer to 2.84 more) (494, 500, 507, 508), but 
with wide CIs that could not exclude the possibility 
of harm. Furthermore, point estimates suggested that 
awake proning may result in increased serious adverse 
events (RR 2.54, 95% CI, 0.61—10.58, very low cer -
tainty) (494, 496, 498, 499, 503).
Two recently published systematic reviews of awake 
proning for COVID-19 patients both found that the 
intervention was associated with a reduced need for 
intubation and mechanical ventilation (493, 510). In 
contrast to our analysis, an individual patient level 
meta-analysis also concluded that mortality was 
reduced with awake proning (RR 0.70, 95% CI, 0.59–
0.84) (493). However, our evidence synthesis differed 
in analytic approach as well as inclusion criteria (RCTs 
only; awake proning vs. no proning, no assessment of 
proning duration).
Awake proning can be accomplished with min-
imal cost and appears safe but has been studied only 
in patients with COVID-19. These results will be im-
portant for another future pandemic, because of the 
low cost and wide availability of proning. In addition, 
there is considerable equity in low-resource settings 
where there may be a shortage of ventilators. Since 
the duration of proning depends on patient tolerance 
(and patients should not be sedated to achieve proning 
when not intubated), we are unable to make a recom-
mendation on the duration of awake proning.
Invasive Mechanical Ventilation
71.  For adults with sepsis and ARDS, we 
“recommend” using a low tidal volume 
ventilation strategy (6 mL/kg) over a high 
tidal volume strategy (> 10 mL/kg).
(strong recommendation, high certainty of 
evidence) Carryover 
72.  For adults with sepsis-associated hypox-
emic respiratory failure without ARDS, we 
“suggest” using a tidal volume of 6—8 mL/kg 
ideal body weight (IBW) over a lower (4 to 
< 6 mL/kg IBW) tidal volume.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Patients should be screened regularly 
for development of ARDS, as ARDS diag-
nosis is often missed or delayed in clinical 
practice.New
Prescott et al50     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 473. For adults with sepsis and ARDS, we “rec-
ommend” using an upper limited goal for 
plateau pressure of 30 cm H2o) over higher 
plateau pressures.
(strong recommendation, high certainty of 
evidence)Carryover
74. For adults with sepsis and moderate-severe 
ARDS, we “suggest” using higher positive 
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) over lower 
PEEP .
(conditional recommendation, moderate cer-
tainty of evidence)Carryover
75. For adults with sepsis and moderate-severe 
ARDS, we “recommend against” using an 
incremental PEEP titration strategy
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of 
evidence)Carryover
76. For adults with sepsis and moderate-severe 
ARDS, we “suggest” using prone ventilation 
for greater than 12 hr daily.
(conditional recommendation, moderate cer-
tainty of evidence)Carryover
77 . For adults with sepsis and moderate-severe 
ARDS, we “suggest” using intermittent 
NMBA boluses over continuous NMBA 
infusion.
(conditional recommendation, moderate 
certainty of evidence)Carryover
Most statements on invasive mechanical ventilation 
were carried over, please see 2021 guidelines for ra-
tionale (65, 66).
There is a lack of guidance regarding the optimal 
tidal volume for mechanically ventilated patients 
without ARDS, particularly considering low vs. mod-
erate tidal volumes. We identified two RCTs compar -
ing low (4–6 mL/kg IBW) vs. moderate tidal volumes 
(8–10 mL/kg IBW) in general populations of me-
chanically ventilated critically ill patients, including 
those with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and 
sepsis, which informed our recommendation (511, 
512). Meta-analysis revealed possibly no difference 
in mortality at 90 days (RR 1.04; 95% CI, 0.89–1.22), 
although CIs could not exclude harm. We similarly 
found no important difference between low and 
moderate tidal volumes in hospital LOS (MD 0.66 d 
shorter; 95% CI, 3.5 d shorter to 2.17 d longer, low 
certainty), duration of mechanical ventilation (MD 
0.65 d shorter; 95% CI, 1.52 d shorter to 0.23 d longer, 
moderate certainty), VFD at day 28 (MD 0.05 d more; 
95% CI, 1.34 d fewer to 1.45 d more, very low cer -
tainty), and in incidence of ARDS (RR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.49–1.47, low certainty) and pneumonia (RR 1.10; 
95% CI, 0.66–1.82, low certainty) within 7 days of 
ICU admission. One trial suggested that there may 
be an increased risk for delirium in the lower tidal 
volume group (RR 1.19; 95% CI, 0.99–1.42, moderate 
certainty) (512).
In practice, clinicians commonly ventilate patients 
with moderate tidal volumes not represented in these 
two trials (e.g., 7 mL/kg IBW) (513). We advise clini-
cians to carefully screen their patients for ARDS to 
ensure appropriate tidal volumes are used because 
under-recognition of ARDS occurs in a significant 
proportion (48.7–52.4%) of patients who meet criteria 
(514, 515). Even in patients with known ARDS, there 
are barriers to maintaining evidence-based mechan-
ical ventilatory strategies and clinicians should ensure 
they do not routinely expose patients who are mechan-
ically ventilated to higher tidal volumes (e.g., > 10 mL/
kg IBW) (516, 517).
Given the balance of effects and pragmatic concerns 
that ARDS is often under-recognized the panel felt that 
recommending lower tidal volumes of 6–8 mL/kg IBW 
in adults who are mechanically ventilated for sepsis-
induced hypoxemic respiratory failure without ARDS 
was the safest approach to prevent volume-induced 
lung injuries in those patients who may have early 
evolving or unrecognized ARDS.
Venovenous ECMO
78.  For adults with severe ARDS due to 
sepsis, we “suggest” using veno-venous 
ECMO when conventional mechanical 
ventilation fails in experienced centers with 
infrastructure to support its use.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of 
evidence) Carryover 
This statement was carried over, please see the 2021 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
ADJUNCTIVE THERAPIES FOR THE 
MANAGEMENT OF SEPSIS
This section of the guideline addresses adjunctive 
therapies specifically for the management of sepsis. 
Recommendations pertain to the use of therapies for 
the management of sepsis. It is recognized that some 
of these therapies may be prescribed for reasons other 
than sepsis and may continue when a patient has sepsis 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     51(e.g., continuation of vitamin D for treatment of preex-
isting vitamin D deficiency).
IV Corticosteroids
79.  For adults with septic shock, we “suggest” 
using IV corticosteroids.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
Corticosteroids have been studied extensively in 
adults with multiple types of infection, including 
sepsis and septic shock, with a recent meta-analysis 
identifying 45 RCTs including 9543 patients (518). 
Corticosteroids may result in a small reduction in 
28-day mortality (RR 0.92; 95% CI, 0.83–1.01, low 
certainty) and long-term mortality at 60 days or 
later (RR 0.94; 95% CI, 0.88–1.00, low certainty), al-
though these results are limited by imprecision and 
inconsistency, given the heterogeneity of popula-
tions and interventions across trials. We a priori 
evaluated subgroups based on population (sepsis 
vs. septic shock; pneumonia; ARDS) and cortico-
steroid regimen (with or without mineralocorticoid; 
high vs. low dose; short vs. long course; intermittent 
vs. continuous infusion). These subgroup analyses 
were likely underpowered, but demonstrated sim-
ilar direction of effect favoring steroids, except for 
sepsis without shock (RR 1.09; 95% CI, 0.91–1.31). 
Corticosteroids result in a greater incidence of shock 
reversal at 7 days (RR 1.29; 95% CI, 1.13–1.46, high 
certainty); increases in hyperglycemia (RR 1.19; 95% 
CI, 1.10–1.28) and hypernatremia (RR 1.64; 95% CI, 
1.32–2.03, moderate certainty); and an uncertain 
effect on neuromuscular weakness (RR 1.13; 95% 
CI, 0.48–2.65, very low certainty). The panel judged 
most patients and clinicians would consider these 
potential adverse events to be outweighed by the po-
tential benefits on mortality and shock reversal and 
thus made a conditional recommendation favor -
ing IV corticosteroids in patients with septic shock. 
Given the widespread availability and low cost of hy-
drocortisone, this recommendation is also applicable 
to low resource settings.
The panel chose not to make separate recommenda-
tions for patients with pneumonia or ARDS, acknowl-
edging that while subsets of these populations may 
have sepsis, and benefit from corticosteroids, they 
are beyond the scope of this guideline and instead addressed in other guidelines (392, 519, 520). Our 
conditional recommendation for use of corticoste-
roids in septic shock is consistent with a recent SCCM 
guideline on the use of steroids in sepsis, ARDS, and 
pneumonia (392).
A recent dose-response meta-analysis (518) of ste-
roids found no increased benefit above 260 mg/day 
of hydrocortisone or equivalent, consistent with the 
low-dose steroid regimen studied in the largest trial, 
ADRENAL (521) (200 mg IV hydrocortisone × 7 d) 
and previous SSC guidance (65, 66). “In our prac-
tice, ” 88.4% of panel member use IV corticosteroids 
in patients with septic shock. Among panel members 
who use IV corticosteroids, 90% prescribe 200 mg 
hydrocortisone-equivalent per 24-hour period, 86% 
as intermittent doses rather than as continuous infu-
sion. Timing of steroid initiation was more varied. “In 
our practice, ” 34% initiate steroids at vasopressor doses 
of less than 0.2 µg/kg/min norepinephrine, 38% at 
0.2–0.3 µg/kg/min, and 28% at greater than 0.3 µg/kg 
minutes; 32% within 2 hours of vasopressor initiation, 
34% within 2–4 hours, and 33% more than 4 hours 
after vasopressors are started. 63% of the panel never 
provides concomitant fludrocortisone; 26% sometimes 
does, and only 10% “usually” or “always” provide it. 
When given for the sole purpose of septic shock in a 
patient who is clinically improving, 61% of panelists 
stop steroids without a taper, whereas 39% taper before 
discontinuing.
Antipyretics
80.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” the use of antipyretic therapy, 
either pharmacologic or surface cooling, for the 
purpose of improving clinical outcomes.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of 
evidence)
Remark: This recommendation does not apply to 
using antipyretic therapy for pain control, patient 
symptom control, or for patients with other 
indications for temperature control, such as neuro 
critical care patients or patients after cardiac 
arrest. New 
Fever is a cardinal sign of infection and has been 
viewed as both a potentially adaptive and maladaptive 
response to infection. In patients with sepsis or septic 
shock, it is unclear if antipyretic therapies to treat fever 
result in clinical benefit or harm. We used a system-
atic review of 13 RCTs (522), including a total 3333 
Prescott et al52     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4adults with infection, to evaluate the use of pharma-
cologic agents (acetaminophen or non-steroidal anti- 
inflammatory agents) and/or surface cooling.  
mortality at 28–90 days, with very low certainty due 
to imprecision (RR 1.02; 95% CI, 0.86–1.21, very low 
certainty). Three trials reported an uncertain effect 
on shock reversal at a variety of time points (RR 1.20; 
95% CI, 0.84–1.72, very low certainty). Similarly, there 
was an uncertain effect on LOS (MD –0.12 d; 95% CI, 
0.72–0.49, very low certainty).
Given the additional work required for fever control 
(e.g., medication administration, cooling blankets, etc) 
and the absence of clinical benefit, the panel made a 
conditional recommendation against the use of anti-
pyretic therapy for the purposes of temperature con-
trol. The panel made a remark supporting the use of 
these techniques for symptom control, recognizing 
that many patients may be uncomfortable with fever 
and benefit from these therapies for symptom manage-
ment. The trade-off of symptomatic treatment is that 
worsening or new fever and infection may be missed, 
potentially delaying diagnoses. The patient panel 
agreed with this assessment, noting that for patients 
with severe infection, missed diagnoses from mask-
ing fever would be worse than foregoing symptomatic 
treatment of fever, but that this decision would need to 
be made on a case-by-case basis.
IV Vitamin C
81.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using IV vitamin C in 
patients with sepsis or septic shock.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
We updated two previous systematic reviews (523, 524) 
and identified 6 additional trials (525–530) for a total 
of 55 RCTs evaluating IV vitamin C as monotherapy 
or in combination with thiamin and corticosteroids. 
Many trials were small, single-center, and at high risk 
of bias. We found possibly no difference in mortality at 
90 days, reported in 7 RCTs at low risk of bias (RR 1.06; 
95% CI, 0.95–1.18, low certainty evidence). among tri-
als reporting mortality at a shorter endpoint (28–30 d), 
we found a significant subgroup effect, with low risk of 
bias trials not demonstrating an effect (RR 0.97; 95% 
CI, 0.82–1.13) and high risk of bias trials suggesting a 
reduction in mortality (RR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.58–0.92), p value for subgroup differences 0.05. There may be a 
trivial reduction in the duration of vasopressors (MD 
18.7 hr; 95% CI, –25.25 to –12.11 hr, low certainty), 
and certainty of evidence for all outcomes was low or 
very low. Although the included studies demonstrated 
a low risk of adverse events, IV vitamin C can result in 
factitious hyperglycemia, and the largest trial (LOVIT) 
proactively modified glucose monitoring strategies to 
avoid this risk (531). Given the lack of an impact on 
mortality seen in the low risk of bias trials, the panel 
made a conditional recommendation against the use 
of IV vitamin C in sepsis. It is unlikely that small, 
single-center RCTs, or studies using similar doses to 
those already evaluated will result in practice chang-
ing evidence on this topic. Despite the current body 
of evidence, patient representatives to the guidelines 
panel indicated enthusiasm about ongoing research on 
vitamin C at different duration or dosage.
IV Immunoglobulin (IVIG)
82.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using IV immunoglobulins.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
We did not identify any new large RCTs evaluating IV 
immunoglobulin (IVIG) in sepsis or septic shock since 
the 2021 guidelines (532). In addition to IgM-enriched 
vs. non-enriched IgM, we also evaluated subgroups of 
high vs. low dose IVIG. Please see the 2021 SSC guide-
lines for rationale (65, 66).
Blood Purification
83.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using blood purification 
techniques, including hemoperfusion, high-
dose hemofiltration, or plasma exchange.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
84.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock 
we “suggest against” using polymyxin B 
hemoperfusion.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)Carryover
Blood purification has been proposed and studied 
as an adjunctive therapy for sepsis. The rationale for 
this therapy is to modulate the host immune response 
by removing excess inflammatory mediators (e.g., 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     53inflammatory cytokines or lipopolysaccharides) and/
or restoring deficient plasma proteins, thereby improv-
ing clinical outcomes by mitigating the manifestations 
of a dysfunctional immune response (533–535).
We updated existing systematic reviews of blood pu-
rification techniques, which included RCTs of hemo-
perfusion/hemadsorption (41 RCTs), hemofiltration 
(26 RCTs), and plasmapheresis (4 RCTs) (534, 535). 
Despite many RCTs, we are uncertain of the impact 
of blood purification on mortality. Although there is a 
signal for a reduction in short-term mortality (28–30 
d) with all three techniques (hemoperfusion RR 0.83; 
95% CI, 0.71–0.98, low certainty; hemofiltration RR 
0.61; 95% CI, 0.61–0.90, low certainty; plasmapher -
esis RR 0.64; 95% CI, 0.46–0.89, low certainty), the 
certainty of evidence is low due to varying factors for 
each technique (hemoperfusion–inconsistency, impre-
cision; hemofiltration–risk of bias, inconsistency; and 
plasmapheresis- very serious imprecision). Few trials 
report on longer-term mortality outcomes for hemo-
perfusion (four RCTs) and hemofiltration (five RCTs), 
and these do not demonstrate a beneficial effect for 
hemoperfusion (RR 1.11; 95% CI, 0.94–1.30, low cer -
tainty) or hemofiltration (RR 0.93; 95% CI, 0.78–1.11, 
very low certainty). There are inconsistent findings 
suggestive of benefit in non-mortality outcomes. There 
are many potential reasons for inconsistency across 
studies, including differences in study quality and im-
pact on co-treatment (e.g., anticoagulation dosing, 
antimicrobial dosing, absorption of norepinephrine 
by the blood purification technique). The earliest tri-
als, including some with the largest effects, are over 
20 years old and provide sepsis care inconsistent with 
current standards (536, 537). The panel reviewed sub-
group analyses based upon mechanism (endotoxin 
absorption vs. inflammatory mediators) and did not 
find sufficient evidence to provide a separate recom-
mendation. The substantial resource requirements and 
impacts upon health equity of these treatments in the 
absence of clear benefit led to a conditional recom-
mendation against any of these therapies.
There is an important need for more research to 
identify sepsis phenotypes which may benefit from 
blood purification treatments (e.g., cutoff levels of 
lipopolysaccharide or inflammatory markers), and 
rigorous trials with high-quality ancillary care to en-
sure the blood purification technique is delivered con-
sistently, safely, and effectively. Rigorous, multicenter RCTs are needed to explore this important area of 
sepsis research; small single-center RCTs are unlikely 
to result in practice-changing evidence. There are on-
going trials meeting these criteria, such as the Tigris 
RCT, NCT03901807 (538). The Tigris RCTs is evalu-
ating Polymyxin B Hemoperfusion in a specific sub-
population of patients with septic shock (endotoxin 
activity assay 0.60–0.89 units and multi-organ failure), 
informed by an exploratory post hoc analysis of the 
EUPHRATES RCT suggesting potential benefit in this 
subpopulation (533, 538, 539).
Vitamin D
85.  For adults with sepsis and septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using Vitamin D therapy for 
sepsis treatment.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of 
evidence)
Remark: This recommendation does not pertain to 
patients who are on lower doses of Vitamin D 
supplement for other indication or receiving it as 
part of standard nutritional practice. New 
Preclinical data suggest that vitamin D has immuno-
modulatory properties and is essential for lung func-
tion (540). Vitamin D has thus been proposed and 
tested as a therapy to improve outcomes in critically ill 
patients (540).
We updated an existing systematic review of vi-
tamin D therapy in sepsis, including 11 RCTs (541). 
There are uncertain effects of vitamin D therapy on 
mortality (RR 0.84; 95% CI, 0.68, 1.04, from 9 tri-
als of 2003 patients, very low certainty), duration of 
mechanical ventilation (MD –3.74; 95% CI, –9.18 to 
1.70; from 1 trial of 50 patients, very low certainty), 
and ICU LOS (MD –4.94; 95% CI, –8.28 to –1.59; 
from 7 trials of 819 patients, very low certainty) in 
patients with sepsis. Evidence was rated down for 
risk of bias in the included studies, inconsistency 
of results, indirectness of data (including studies 
of general ICU patients), and imprecision. Vitamin 
D therapy may have little to no impact on adverse 
events including hypercalcemia (RR 1.30; 95% CI, 
0.59, 2.83; from 1 trial of 1036 patients, low cer -
tainty) and renal stones (RR 0.14; 95% CI, 0.01, 2.76; 
from 1 trial of 1014 patients, low certainty) (540). 
In the VIOLET trial, the subgroup of patients with 
sepsis (350 patients) had a higher 90 mortality risk 
with high-dose (540,000 international units) enteral 
Prescott et al54     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4vitamin D supplementation (absolute risk increase 
12.4%; 95% CI, 3.2–21.6%) (540). Given the very low 
certainty of evidence, the balance of undesirable and 
desirable effects, and the subgroup analysis in the 
VIOLET trial of patients with sepsis suggesting pos-
sible harm, the panel made a conditional recommen-
dation against the vitamin D therapy for sepsis. The 
panel noted this recommendation does not pertain 
to patients who are on lower doses of vitamin D sup-
plementation for other indications, or standard-dose 
vitamin D supplementation for treatment of vitamin 
D deficiency.
IV XueBiJing
86.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using XueBiJing injection 
outside of jurisdictions where it has regulatory 
approval.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) New 
XueBiJing is an herbal product (containing Carthami 
Flos, Paeoniae Radix Rubra, Chuanxiong Rhizoma, 
Salviae Miltiorrhizae Radix et Rhizoma, and Angelicae 
Sinensis Radix) that was licenced in 2004 for treatment 
of sepsis in China (542). XueBiJing has several poten-
tial mechanisms of action against sepsis including 
antagonistic effects on endotoxin and inflammatory 
mediators (542).
We updated two systematic reviews (543, 544) of 
XueBiJing in severe infection, identifying a total of 30 
RCTs, of which only 22 could be located. Although 
the evidence suggests that XueBiJing injection may 
result in a large reduction in mortality at 28–30 days 
(RR 0.68; 95% CI, 0.45–1.32, low certainty), as well 
as moderate-to-large improvements in important out-
comes, such as ICU LOS (MD 3.16 d fewer; 95% CI, 
4.56 d fewer to 1.77 d fewer, low certainty), the panel 
had substantial concerns about risk of bias in many 
included studies and the applicability of the evidence 
to general sepsis populations outside of China, where 
all trials where conducted. The two largest high-  
quality RCTs (542, 545) demonstrate high control 
group mortality rates despite recruiting relatively non-
sick populations (53% and 62% of patients ventilated; 
with 28-d mortality rates of 26% and 25%, respec-
tively), and a low use of steroids (~14%) (542, 545). 
These data suggest the included trials populations may 
be different from those treated in other ICUs around the world, resulting in indirectness. Lastly, there are 
substantial feasibility issues as XueBiJing is not avail-
able in most countries, and a route to approval of an 
IV herbal injection in many jurisdictions is unclear. 
How the medication would interact with other thera-
pies commonly used in other healthcare systems (e.g., 
corticosteroids), is unclear. More research to evaluate 
XueBiJing’s effects, including adverse events, in other 
settings would be required to provide adequate ex-
ternal validation before a recommendation could be 
made for more widespread use. This is a future re-
search priority.
ADDITIONAL SUPPORTIVE 
THERAPIES IN PATIENTS WITH 
SEPSIS
This section of the guideline addresses additional ther -
apies that are pertinent to patients with sepsis but are 
not prescribed specifically for the treatment of sepsis.
Stress Ulcer Prophylaxis
87 .  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, and 
who have risk factors for GI bleeding, we 
“suggest” using stress ulcer prophylaxis with 
proton-pump inhibitors over not using stress 
ulcer prophylaxis.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty 
of evidence) Revisited 
We updated an existing systematic review (546) with 
12 RCTs, including the 2024 REVISE trial (547), which 
evaluated the impact of proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) 
on clinically important gastrointestinal bleeding. PPIs 
reduced the risk of clinically-important gastrointes-
tinal bleeding (9 trials; RR 0.48; 95% CI, 0.30–078, 
moderate certainty), with an uncertain effect on mor -
tality (12 trials; RR 0.99; 95% CI, 0.93–1.05, very low 
certainty), C. difficile infection (6 trials; RR 0.19; 95% 
CI, 0.75–1.87, very low certainty), duration of me-
chanical ventilation (7 trials; MD 1.46 d more; 95% CI, 
1.47 fewer to 4.39 more, very low certainty) and pneu-
monia (8 trials; RR 1.00; 95% CI, 0.92–1.09, very low 
certainty). Evidence was rated down for indirectness 
as the trials did not specifically examine patients with 
sepsis or septic shock. The panel suggested the use of 
PPIs for stress ulcer prophylaxis in adults with sepsis 
and septic shock at risk for clinically important bleed-
ing. A recent systematic review suggests that the most 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     55important risk factors for clinically important bleeding 
include acute kidney injury, male gender, coagulopa-
thy, shock, and chronic liver failure (548). The panel 
noted that there may be an interaction between enteral 
nutrition and risk of clinically important bleeding. The 
use of enteral nutrition was reported in 8 trials; fu-
ture studies should examine the need for stress ulcer 
prophylaxis in enterally fed patients who do not have 
other risk factors for stress ulcer related bleeding.
Since stress ulcer prophylaxis is widespread avail-
able and requires few resources, this recommendation 
is applicable to low resource settings. In the absence of 
PPIs, H2 receptor antagonists are a reasonable alterna-
tive (549).
This 2024 SCCM and American Society of Health-
System Pharmacists Guideline for the Prevention of 
Stress-Related Gastrointestinal Bleeding in Critically 
Ill Adults suggests use of stress ulcer prophylaxis to 
prevent clinically important bleeding (550). However, 
in contrast to this guideline, it suggests use of either 
PPIs of H2 receptor antagonists as first-line. We fo-
cused our PICO question on PPIs because prior net-
work meta-analysis (550) suggested that PPIs are 
superior to HR receptor antagonists at preventing clin-
ically important bleeding (RR 0.53; 95% CI, 0.34–0.83) 
and most recent trials examining stress ulcer prophy-
laxis (e.g., SUPICU, PEPTIC, REVISE) (547, 551, 552) 
have used PPIs.
Probiotics
88.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using probiotics.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of 
evidence) New 
The microbiome (millions of microorganisms that live 
on and within humans) performs essential functions 
contributing to health, immune function, and digestion 
(553, 554). Microbial dysbiosis is common in critical 
illness, including sepsis (553, 554). Microbiome health 
and clinical outcomes might therefore be improved 
with priobiotic therapy (live microorganisms) or sym-
biotic therapy (combination of live microorganisms 
and prebiotics, substrates that promote growth of 
healthy bacteria) (553, 554).
There are over 65 RCTs evaluating probiotics or 
symbiotics in the ICU, including over 20 different 
bacterial species alone or in combination (555). We identified 41 RCTs that evaluated mortality, find-
ing probiotics may have little to no impact on mor -
tality (RR 0.95; 95% CI, 0.87–1.04, low certainty). The 
effects of probiotics on V AP (18 RCTs RR 0.67; 95% 
CI, 0.54–0.83, very low certainty) and duration of in-
vasive mechanical ventilation (12 RCTs; MD 3.28 d 
fewer; 95% CI, 5.67–0.90 d fewer; very low certainty) 
were uncertain but point estimates suggested po-
tential benefit. However, when restricted to trials at 
low risk of bias, including the large PROSPECT trial 
(556), these improvements were no longer observed. 
Compounding this uncertainty is the indirectness 
of the populations studied (only a minority of stud-
ies were patients with sepsis, most were general ICU 
populations), and wide variety of potential probiotic/
symbiotic regimens to choose from. Overall, the panel 
was uncertain as to the effect of probiotics in sepsis; 
given the lack of benefit seen in the low risk of bias 
trials, the panel made a conditional recommendation 
against the use of probiotics. Future trials of different 
organisms, in sepsis-specific populations, and in the 
recovery phase of sepsis may help to inform future 
recommendations.
Active Fluid Removal
89.  For adults with septic shock after the acute 
resuscitation phase, we “suggest” using active 
fluid removal.
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty 
evidence).
Remark: Acute resuscitation refers to escalating 
doses of vasopressors, ongoing high doses 
of vasopressors, or needing ongoing volume 
expansion. Active fluid removal refers to diuretics 
and, if diuretics are insufficient, ultrafiltration 
or extracorporeal fluid removal. Factors to be 
considered when deciding to initiate active 
fluid removal include cardiorespiratory function; 
vasopressor dose; clinical course; peripheral 
edema; weight; and fluid balance. New 
Fluid overload in patients with sepsis and septic shock 
can lead to tissue edema, impaired oxygen delivery, 
and organ dysfunction and is associated, in obser -
vational studies, with increased mortality (557). The 
management of fluid balance appears to be impor -
tant, therefore, particularly in the “evacuation” or “de- 
escalation” phase of resuscitation (558, 559). Recent 
RCTs have explored the efficacy of active fluid removal 
and de-resuscitation strategies.
Prescott et al56     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4We considered a recent meta-analysis (560) consist-
ing of 13 RCTs (368, 372, 561–571) (2,517 patients), of 
which 10 RCTs (372, 563–571) (2,239 patients) assessed 
de-resuscitation strategies with diuretics only, 3 RCTs 
(368, 561, 562) assessed de-resuscitation strategies with 
diuretics plus ultrafiltration; 3 RCTs (368, 372, 562) (184 
patients) focused specifically on patients sepsis).
Across all critically ill patients, the pooled analysis 
demonstrated an uncertain effect of active fluid re-
moval on mortality (RR 0.92, 95% CI, 0.81–1.04, very 
low certainty), with the use of diuretics only (RR 0.89, 
95% CI, 0.78–1.01) having a potentially more favorable 
effect than the use of diuretics with or without RRT 
(RR 1.13; 95% CI, 0.83–1.53). The pooled effects on 
receipt of RRT (RR 0.83, 95% CI, 0.64–1.08, very low 
certainty), ICU LOS (MD 0.3 d longer; 95% CI, 1.07 
shorter to 1.66 longer, very low certainty), vasopressor 
free-days (MD 0.30 d shorter; 95% CI, 4.25 shorter 
to 3.64 longer, very low certainty), and health-related 
quality of life (MD 0.1 units higher; 95% CI, 0.13 lower 
to 0.33 higher, very low certainty) were likewise uncer -
tain, and the effect on ischemic complications could 
not be estimated. Mortality among the subgroup of 
sepsis patients was also uncertain (RR 1.33, 95% CI, 
0.75–2.34, very low certainty). Our suggestion for 
active fluid removal was influenced input from patient 
representatives to the SSC guidelines, who placed a 
high value on avoiding edema.
Our suggestion to use active fluid removal after the 
acute resuscitation phase in septic shock is consistent 
with the ESICM Clinical Practice Guideline (560) 
on fluid therapy in adult critically ill patients which 
suggests protocolized fluid removal by diuretics but 
against the routine  use of ultrafiltration or extracorpo-
real fluid removal without other indication for RRT in 
a general critically ill population.
Future research is needed to address this question 
specifically in patients with sepsis.
Blood Transfusion
90.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” using a restrictive transfusion 
strategy over a liberal transfusion strategy.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of 
evidence) Carryover 
This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).Enteral Nutrition
91.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” early (within 72 h) initiation of 
enteral nutrition.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
of evidence) Carryover 
This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Insulin Therapy
92.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” initiating insulin therapy at a 
glucose level of ≥180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L)
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of 
evidence) Carryover 
This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Renal Replacement Therapy
93.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock and 
acute kidney injury, with no definitive indication 
for renal replacement therapy, we “suggest 
against” using renal replacement therapy.
(conditional recommendation, moderate 
certainty of evidence) Carryover 
94.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock 
and acute kidney injury warranting renal 
replacement therapy, we “suggest” either 
continuous or intermittent renal replacement 
therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of 
evidence)Carryover
These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Sodium Bicarbonate
95.  For adults with septic shock and 
hypoperfusion-induced lactic acidemia, we 
“suggest against” using sodium bicarbonate 
therapy to improve hemodynamics or to 
reduce vasopressor requirements.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of 
evidence) Carryover 
96. For adults with septic shock, severe 
metabolic acidemia (pH ≤7 .2), and acute 
kidney injury (AKIN score 2 or 3), we 
“suggest” using sodium bicarbonate therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
of evidence)Carryover
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     57These statements were carried over, please see the 2021 
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis
97 .  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” using pharmacologic venous 
thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis unless a 
contraindication exists.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of 
evidence) Carryover 
98.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” using low molecular weight 
heparin over unfractionated heparin for VTE 
prophylaxis
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of 
evidence)Carryover
99.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest” using pharmacological VTE 
prophylaxis alone over pharmacological 
VTE prophylaxis plus mechanical VTE 
prophylaxis.
(conditional recommendation, moderate 
certainty of evidence)Carryover
These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
GOALS OF CARE
Goals of Care Discussions
100.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
clinicians should discuss goals of care and 
prognosis with patients and/or families.
(good practice statement) Carryover 
101.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” addressing goals of care early 
(within 72 h) over late (72 h or later)
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of 
evidence)Carryover
These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Standardized Criteria to Trigger Goals of Care 
Discussions
102.  For adult patients with sepsis or septic 
shock, there is “insufficient evidence” to 
issue a recommendation regarding the 
use of a specific standardized criterion 
to identify patients for goals of care 
discussions. Revisited Goals of care (GoC) discussions are crucial to patient-
centered care, especially in serious or life-threatening 
conditions like sepsis. Although some patients opt 
for all available medical interventions, others may 
seek limitations based on prognosis, invasiveness of 
interventions, and anticipated quality of life. GoC dis-
cussions help ensure treatment decisions align with 
patients’ values and preferences. As many patients have 
not previously documented their GoC preferences, 
proactive discussions are critical.
In a recent cohort study of over 18,000 patients hos-
pitalized with sepsis, GoC discussions did not occur 
consistently during hospitalization and there was 
marked variation in practice across hospitals (572). 
Observational studies have reported on the use of elec-
tronic medical record, machine learning, and natural 
language processing to assess GoC documentation and 
timing (573, 574). However, a standardized approach 
to trigger GoC discussions remains unclear.
We identified one non-randomized, before-after 
pilot study (575) with 84 patients, in which the inter -
vention involved informing the treating hospitalist of 
the patient’s predicted 30-day mortality on hospital 
day two to promote early GoC discussion. The im-
pact of intervention on GoC discussion was uncertain 
(GoC discussion occurred in16.7% of patients in in-
tervention arm vs. 4.8% in the usual care arm, RR 3.50; 
95% CI, 0.77–15.88, very low certainty) (575).
Due to limited evidence and inability to determine 
resource requirements or care equity, the panel made 
no recommendation on specific standardized criteria 
to identify patients for GoC discussions. Although we 
cannot recommend specific standardized criteria, pa-
tient representatives to the SSC guidelines advocated 
that GoC be discussed and addressed in a transparent, 
explicit, and authentic manner.
Advanced Directives
103.  Health systems should implement strategies 
to ensure that patients being discharged from 
hospital after sepsis or septic shock have the 
opportunity to execute advanced directives.
(good practice statement) New 
104.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
there is “insufficient evidence” to issue 
a recommendation on the systematic 
establishment of advanced care directives 
before hospital discharge.New
Prescott et al58     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4Advanced care directives document patient’s wishes 
regarding life-sustaining treatments, providing clear, 
formal guidance to healthcare providers and family 
members when the patient cannot communicate or 
make decisions. These directives typically address a 
range of medical interventions and help ensure that 
healthcare decisions are made in alignment with 
the patient’s values, even in the event of incapacity. 
Although advanced care directives can provide valu-
able clarity and prevent unwanted or non-concordant 
treatments, there is insufficient evidence to determine 
whether the systematic establishment of such direc-
tives, particularly before hospital discharge, leads to 
better patient or family outcomes.
The systematic implementation of GoC discussions, 
conducted alone or as part of multicomponent palli-
ative care or ethics interventions, has been studied in 
three RCTs, one cluster RCT, and three observational 
studies of patients with serious illness (including, 
but not limited to, patients with sepsis) (576–581). 
The evaluated intervention probably led to increased 
changes in code status (one trial; RR, 2.15; 95% CI, 
1.44–3.21, moderate certainty) (580) and may have 
led to increased GoC discussions (one trial; RR 1.24; 
95% CI, 1.01–1.54, low certainty). The panel found 
these findings supportive of value-concordant care, 
even though GoC conversations, their perceived value, 
and implementation vary across regions and health-
care systems due to differing sociocultural norms and 
medical practices. Nonetheless, the panel assessed the 
evidence to be of very low certainty, so we could not 
generate a recommendation regarding systematically 
discussing and establishing advanced care directives 
before hospital discharge. The panel judged this to be 
an important issue and that health systems should im-
plement strategies to ensure that patients can execute 
advanced care directives if they wish.
Time-Limited Trials
105.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
there is “insufficient evidence” to issue a 
recommendation regarding formal time-limited 
trials (TLTs) of critical care.
Remark: A TLT is a collaborative plan to use life-
sustaining therapy for a defined duration, after 
which response to therapy informs the decision as 
to whether to continue or escalate curative intent 
ICU care or to instead focus care on other goals. New A time-limited trial (TLT) is an approach to com-
munication and decision-making that complements 
other methods of prognostic communication and 
shared decision-making (582). A TLT has been de-
fined as “a collaborative plan among clinicians and 
a patient and/or their surrogate decision maker(s) 
to use life-sustaining therapy for a defined dura-
tion, after which the patient’s response to therapy 
informs the decision as to whether to continue or es-
calate curative intent ICU care or to instead focus on 
care with other goals” (583). ICU care is sometimes 
delivered discordantly with patient’s treatment pref-
erences (584), due to avoidance of prognostication, 
stemming from uncertainty about treatment respon-
siveness or clinical inertia (585). TLTs may help align 
care with treatment preferences and limit intensity of 
treatment.
We identified one before-after study that assessed the 
impact of TLTs on relevant outcomes. In this 3-center 
study performed in one city, clinicians were trained to 
perform daily assessments to identify patients at risk 
for potentially nonbeneficial treatments due to ad-
vanced illness. TLTs were the default communication 
and care-planning approach used in family meetings 
for these patients. During the intervention period, 
TLTs increased, as did high-quality family meetings. 
This change in practice was associated with a possible 
increase in “do not resuscitate” orders (RR 1.27; 95% 
CI, 1.10–1.45, low certainty), a possible reduction in 
ICU LOS (MD 2.9 d shorter, 4.89 d shorter to 0.91 d 
shorter, low certainty), and an unclear impact on hos-
pital mortality (RR 1.00; 95% CI, 0.79–1.26, very low 
certainty) (586).
Although this study suggested some desirable 
outcomes with TLTs, the non-randomized design, 
small sample size, and concerns about whether the 
intervention truly reflected formal TLTs (vs. simply 
earlier GoC discussions) led the panel to conclude 
there was insufficient evidence to issue a recom-
mendation. “In our practice, ” 64% of the panel uses 
TLTs (specifically: use life-sustaining therapy for a 
defined duration, after which the patient’s response 
to therapy informs the decision to continue care 
directed toward recovery, transition to care focused 
exclusively on comfort, or extend the trial’s dura-
tion), and among these, 64% “sometimes” and 27% 
“always” explicitly discuss the use of TLTs with the 
patient or surrogate decision maker.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     59The panel noted that the effects of integrating 
formal TLTs likely depend on the quality of communi-
cation and shared decision-making to which they are 
added—existing care may include practices function-
ally equivalent to TLTs. The panel further noted there 
is evidence of inequity in how ICU clinicians interact 
with minoritized populations (587, 588), and that if 
done poorly, or if imposed without effective shared  
decision-making, TLTs could worsen care and ineq-
uity. Additional research is needed to determine the 
impact of TLTs, to guide individualization of TLTs, 
on training clinicians to discuss TLTs with patients 
and surrogates, and on implementing consistent TLT 
hand-offs between ICU clinicians.
Palliative Care
106.  The principles of palliative care (which 
may include palliative care consultation 
based on clinician judgement) should be 
integrated into the treatment plan, when 
appropriate, to address patient and family 
symptoms and suffering.
(good practice statement) Carryover 
107 .  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest against” routine formal 
palliative care consultation for all patients 
over palliative care consultation based on 
clinician judgement.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of 
evidence)Carryover
These statements were carried over, please see the 2021 
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
TRANSITIONS OF CARE
In-Hospital Transitions
108.  For adults with sepsis and septic shock 
admitted to ICU, we “suggest” using a 
critical care transition program, compared 
with usual care, upon transfer to the floor.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
109.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest” using a handoff process of 
critically important information at transitions 
of care over no such handoff process.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)Carryover
These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).Screening for Economic and Social Support
110.  Hospitals and health systems should 
screen patients with sepsis or septic shock 
for economic and social support needs 
(including housing, nutritional, financial, 
and spiritual support), and make referrals 
where available to meet these needs.
(good practice statement) Carryover 
This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Medication Reconciliation
111.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
comprehensive medication reconciliation 
should be performed at transitions in care, 
including at ICU and hospital discharge.
(good practice statement) Revisited 
112.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest” comprehensive medication 
reconciliation using a pharmacist-based 
approach at transitions in care.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)Revisited
Routine transitions in care among patients with sepsis 
increase risk of polypharmacy and inappropriate med-
ications. The panel generated a good practice state-
ment on the importance of comprehensive medication 
reconciliation whenever a patient transitions from one 
setting to another.
Regarding a pharmacist-led approach to medication 
reconciliation at transitions in care, the panel consid-
ered two (589, 590) before-and-after studies that in-
cluded 658 patients comparing a pharmacist-based 
interventions to usual care. These studies used either 
pharmacy-based electronic hand off tool or a computer-
assisted pharmacy work list to reduce continued pre-
scription of atypical antipsychotics and proton pump 
inhibitors (pantoprazole) initiated in the ICU. The in-
tervention may reduce prescription of antipsychotics 
at ICU transfer (RR 0.84; 95% CI, 0.75–0.94, low cer -
tainty) and PPIs at hospital discharge (RR 0.16; 95% CI, 
0.09–0.30, low certainty) compared with usual care.
The panel judged that there were large desirable 
effects, the balance of effects favors the intervention, 
and the intervention will be acceptable and prob-
ably feasible. Such pharmacy review may already be a  
quality-of-care metric in some healthcare sys-
tems. Costs may be moderate but there are no 
Prescott et al60     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4cost-effectiveness studies. The availability of pharmacy 
support may be limited in low resource settings.
Hospital Discharge Planning
113.  Clinical teams should provide adults with 
sepsis or septic shock and their families 
the opportunity to participate in shared 
decision making in post-ICU and hospital 
discharge planning to ensure discharge 
plans are acceptable and feasible.
(good practice statement) Carryover 
114.  For adult survivors of sepsis or septic 
shock and their families, clinicians should 
provide information about the hospital 
stay, sepsis and related diagnoses, treat-
ments, and common impairments after 
sepsis in the written and verbal discharge 
summary.
(good practice statement)Carryover
115.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock 
who developed new impairments, hospital 
discharge plans should include follow-up 
with clinicians able to support and man-
age new and long-term sequelae.
(good practice statement)Carryover
116.  Healthcare systems should implement 
strategies to ensure that patients, their 
families, and their primary care providers 
are provided with adequate information to 
navigate the transition out of hospital.
(good practice statement)New
117 .  For adults who survive hospitalization 
with sepsis or septic shock, there is 
insufficient evidence to issue a 
recommendation regarding a specific 
structured multi-component discharge 
planning process.Revisited
Several of these statements were carried over, please 
see the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Patients with sepsis and their families often experi-
ence several transitions in care before discharge home. 
Discharge planning, including comprehensive sum-
maries and medication reconciliation are potential 
strategies to assure safe transition from acute care, and 
can provide patients and families with an overview of 
sepsis-related issues.
The panel completed a meta-analysis of 3 RCTs (591–
593) that included a total of 592 patients comparing 
multi-component discharge planning protocols to usual 
care. Only one study (593) specifically studied sepsis sur -
vivors. comprehensive discharge planning may improve distressing patient symptom of pain (SMD –0.16; 95% 
CI, –0.36 to 0.03, low certainty), post-traumatic stress 
(SMD –0.16; 95% CI, –0.37 to 0.04, low certainty), and 
hospital readmissions (RR 0.14; 95% CI, 0.02–1.14, low 
certainty), with an uncertain impact on anxiety, with a 
point estimate favoring usual care (SMD 0.19; 95% CI, 
–0.09 to 0.47, very low certainty).
The panel considered that while the balance of 
effects, acceptability, and the equity impact probably 
favors the intervention, the certainty of evidence was 
low, there are moderate costs associated with the in-
tervention, and implementation may not always be 
feasible. The specific components of the interventions 
in each RCT were highly variable. As such, we were 
unable to generate a recommendation regarding a spe-
cific structured multi-component discharge planning 
process. However, the panel assessed that healthcare 
systems should ensure that patients, families, and their 
primary care clinicians are provided with adequate in-
formation to navigate the transition from hospital to 
community care.
Education of Patients and Families on Sepsis
118.  For adult survivors of sepsis or septic 
shock and their families, clinicians should 
provide information about the hospital stay, 
sepsis and related diagnoses, treatments, 
and common impairments after sepsis in 
the written and verbal discharge summary.
(good practice statement) Carryover. 
119.  For adults with sepsis and septic shock 
and their families, we “suggest” offering 
written and verbal sepsis education 
(diagnosis, treatment, post-ICU/sepsis 
syndrome) before hospital discharge and 
in the follow-up setting.
(conditional recommendation, very low 
certainty evidence)Carryover
These statements were carried over, see the 2021 guide-
lines for rationale (65, 66).
Education of PCPs on Sepsis
120.  Health systems should implement strategies 
to ensure clinicians have the knowledge 
and competency to support sepsis survivors 
and their families during the post-hospital 
recovery.
(good practice statement) New 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     61121. There is “insufficient evidence” to issue a 
recommendation regarding providing sepsis-
focused educational material to primary care 
providers as compared with usual care.New
Sepsis survivors are discharged to PCPs to manage var -
ious comorbidities and sequelae after sepsis. PCP know-
ledge of short- and long-term consequences of sepsis 
may be important help manage ongoing symptoms and 
disabilities. One unblinded RCT (SMOOTH) included 
291 sepsis survivors from 9 ICUs examined the effect of 
a 12-month primary care management intervention on 
short-term (6-mo) and long-term (24-mo) outcomes 
(593). The multicomponent intervention included pro-
active symptom monitoring, clinical decision support 
for PCPs, and training for patients, nurses, and PCPs on  
evidence-based post-sepsis care. The trial did not show an 
improvement in mental health-related quality of life at 6 
or 12 months (593). The panel determined that we cannot 
issue a recommendation on providing educational mate-
rial to PCPs due to insufficient evidence. The panel also 
noted that implementing PCP education would require 
resources and costs, limiting use in low resource settings. 
The patient panel emphasized the importance of educat-
ing patients and families about sepsis and that patients 
and families can anticipate benefits from educating prac-
titioners with limited exposure to survivors of sepsis or 
septic shock following discharge.
Overall, there is insufficient evidence to suggest any 
specific approach to educating primary care provid-
ers. Nonetheless, it is important that health systems 
attempt to improve awareness of post-sepsis sequelae 
among clinicians caring for patients after sepsis. 
Further studies are warranted to identify types of edu-
cational programs, evaluate acceptability, assess know-
ledge retention among practitioners, and determine 
fidelity of the intervention.
Post-Discharge Care Coordination
122.  Health systems should implement 
strategies to support sepsis survivors 
and their families during the post-hospital 
recovery.
(good practice statement) New 
123.  There is “insufficient evidence” to make 
a recommendation on early post-hospital 
discharge follow-up vs. routine post-
hospital discharge follow-up.RevisitedWe did not identify any new studies since the 2021 
SSC guidelines evaluating the impact of timing of  
follow-up on clinical outcomes. Please see the 2021 
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
LONG-TERM OUTCOMES AND 
RECOVERY
Post-hospital Evaluation and Management
124.  Health systems should facilitate 
assessment and follow-up for physical, 
cognitive, and emotional problems after 
hospital discharge for sepsis or septic 
shock.
(good practice statement) Carryover 
125.  For adult survivors of hospitalization for 
sepsis or septic shock, we “suggest” 
offering post critical illness follow-up 
services.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Follow-up services may vary in format, 
intensity, and duration, depending on locally 
available resources and patient needs.Revisited
Patients who survive hospitalization with sepsis or 
septic shock often suffer from new or worsening phys-
ical, cognitive, and emotional problems which they are 
often ill-equipped to navigate (7, 594).
We analyzed eight RCTs (593, 595–601) evaluat-
ing the impact of post critical illness follow-up serv-
ices consisting of variable approaches to the timing of  
follow-up care, the type of care delivered, and the out-
come measures obtained. The included RCTs provided 
peer support programs with multi-component inter -
ventions across transitions of care, follow-up clinics, 
and primary care management programs. We found 
probable small improvements in quality-of-life phys-
ical health component (SMD –0.25; 95% CI, –0.40 to 
–0.11), symptoms of anxiety (MD –1.41; 95% CI, –2.50 
to –0.32) and post-traumatic stress (SMD –0.20, 95% 
CI, –0.37 to –0.02), and a potential reduction in hos-
pital readmissions (RR 0.88; 95% CI, 0.73–1.07).
One study provided cost-effectiveness data (596), 
however, the heterogeneity of interventions precludes 
the ability to evaluate cost-effectiveness of follow-up 
services, and this should be explored in future trials. The 
panel judged that low resource settings might lack the re-
sources to deliver multi-component care. Additionally, 
rural populations might not be able to engage in the 
Prescott et al62     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4delivery of in-person interventions, which could lead to 
inequities. Future research should include remote inter -
ventions. Nonetheless, the panel also recognized that the 
provision of post-hospital care could potentially reduce 
health inequities in certain disadvantaged communities 
(602). Although available data yielded low certainty in the 
efficacy of this intervention, patient experience of these 
programs appears positive (603), and they may provide 
benefit to patients, families, and clinicians. We suggest 
that adult survivors of hospitalization with sepsis or septic 
shock be provided with the opportunity to receive sepsis- 
and critical illness follow-up services. We acknowledge 
that the format, intensity, and duration of such services 
may vary by patient needs and locally available resources.
Despite a clear emphasis from the public panel 
members and other patient and family groups interna-
tionally on the importance of follow-up care for sepsis 
survivors (604), high-quality evidence is lacking. There 
is a need to prioritize research in this area. Future work 
should consider emerging technologies in the delivery 
of post sepsis care as well as understanding patient se-
lection and care delivery intensity.
Physical Rehabilitation
126.  For adult survivors of hospitalization for 
sepsis or septic shock who received 
invasive mechanical ventilation >48 hr, we 
“suggest” offering physical rehabilitation 
services after hospital discharge.
(conditional recommendation; low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Physical rehabilitation services may vary 
in format, intensity, and duration, depending 
on locally available resources and patient 
needs. Revisited 
New physical and functional disability is common fol-
lowing critical illness with sepsis or septic shock and is 
associated with reduced quality of life among survivors 
(7, 605–607).
We identified 12 RCTs evaluating physical rehabil-
itation vs. standard care after hospital discharge that 
included 782 patients who had been mechanically ven-
tilated for 48 h or longer (596, 608–618). These studies 
included a variety of physical rehabilitation interven-
tions designed to ameliorate physical health sequelae 
of critical illness or sepsis. In meta-analysis, the 
interventions were associated with possible improve-
ment in various outcomes, including physical func-
tion using the six minute walk test (SMD 0.21, 95% CI, –0.06 to 0.48, low certainty), quality of life physical 
health component (SMD 0.20 higher; 95% CI, –0.10 to 
0.51, low certainty), quality of life mental health com-
ponent (SMD 0.29 higher; 95% CI, –0.02 to 0.59, low 
certainty), cognitive function (SMD 0.55 higher; 95% 
CI, 0.14–0.97, low certainty), and symptoms of depres-
sion (MD –1.10 lower; 95% CI, –2.30 to 0.10). Adverse 
events were uncommon.
The panel considered that there was important vari-
ability in the included patient populations, the dosage, 
type, and duration of the interventions delivered, and 
the domain, method, and timing of outcome meas-
ures. This variability and the low certainty evidence 
precluded a strong recommendation.
Although there were no concerns about accepta-
bility of physical rehabilitation as an intervention for 
survivors of sepsis, there were concerns about the 
moderate resources and costs required to deliver the 
intervention, and the ability to equitably deliver phys-
ical rehabilitation services remains unclear. There were 
insufficient data to suggest any specific approach to 
physical rehabilitation, and the optimal approach will 
vary by patient and setting.
Given the prevalence of new or worsening physical 
problems experienced by sepsis survivors, and the im-
portance of physical recovery to sepsis survivors and 
their families, the panel suggests offering post critical 
illness physical rehabilitation for survivors of sepsis or 
septic shock, although we acknowledge that such serv-
ices may vary in format, intensity, and duration depend-
ing on patient needs and locally available resources.
Mental Health Services
127 .  For adult survivors of hospitalization for 
sepsis or septic shock, we “suggest” 
offering services that support mental health 
after hospital discharge.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Mental health support services may vary 
in format, intensity, and duration, depending on 
locally available resources and patient needs. Revisited 
128.  Adult survivors of hospitalization for sepsis 
or septic shock who demonstrate clinical 
symptoms of mental health disorders 
should be referred to appropriate 
healthcare professionals for evaluation and 
management.
(good practice statement)Revisited
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     63Patients who survive sepsis often suffer a wide range of 
mental health symptoms in the months and years fol-
lowing hospital discharge (7, 619). Although some of 
these conditions may have predated the hospitalization 
for sepsis, there is evidence to suggest that many are 
newly acquired, developing presumably due to sepsis 
itself or as a consequence of hospital and ICU treat-
ment for sepsis. Post-sepsis mental health diagnoses 
are wide-ranging, and include anxiety, depression, and 
post-traumatic stress disorder (7, 619). Importantly, 
similar findings have been reported in broader ICU 
survivor cohorts and following similar conditions, 
such as severe COVID-19, acute respiratory failure, 
and ARDS (607).
We identified nine RCTs testing variable interven-
tions designed to ameliorate mental health sequelae of 
critical illness or sepsis (593, 600, 620–626). In meta-
analysis, the interventions increased satisfaction with 
care (SMD 0.48; 95% CI, 0.19–0.78, moderate cer -
tainty) and possibly decreased depressive symptoms 
(RR 0.60; 95% CI, 0.32–1.09, low certainty). The effects 
on anxiety and PTSD symptoms were uncertain but 
point estimates suggested a possible decrease in anx-
iety symptoms (RR 0.69; 95% CI, 0.39–1.23, very low 
certainty) and increase in PTSD symptoms (RR 1.22; 
95% CI, 0.94–1.59, very low certainty).
There was considerable variability in the popula-
tions included, the manner and type of interventions 
delivered, and the domain, method, and timing of out-
comes across included studies. This variability ham-
pered our ability to issue strong recommendations. 
Nevertheless, there was broad agreement around some 
core principles, and the panel suggests that adult sur -
vivors of hospitalization for sepsis or septic shock be 
offered services that support mental health after hos-
pital discharge. Such services may vary in format, in-
tensity, and duration, depending on patient needs and 
locally available resources. Although this conditional 
recommendation applies to any survivor of sepsis or 
septic shock, the panel acknowledged that not all sur -
vivors may experience mental health symptoms. In 
low resource settings, which lack specialized personnel 
and have poor availability of mental health services, 
this recommendation is particularly challenging. The 
panel agreed that all patients who demonstrate signs of 
mental health symptoms should be referred for formal 
diagnostic evaluation and management by an appro-
priate healthcare professional.Finally, mental health disorders can coincide with 
physical and cognitive impairment, and interactions 
can occur between these domains of impairment. 
Consequently, interventions targeting one domain 
may affect another, and the most effective interven-
tions may require multiple components, tailored to a 
particular patient’s condition.
Cognition-Targeted Therapy
129.  For adult survivors of hospitalization for sepsis 
or septic shock, there is “insufficient evidence” 
to issue a recommendation regarding cognition-
targeted therapies vs. usual care.
Remark: Where cognitive-targeted therapies are 
being used, it is reasonable to continue using them 
as they are likely acceptable and feasible. New 
Cognitive impairment is common among patients who 
survive sepsis and is a major determinant of caregiving 
needs and costs after sepsis (605). It has been estimated 
that irreversible cognitive damage after critical illness 
and sepsis may be associated with an additional 40 
hours per week of informal care provided by caregiv-
ers, the equivalent of a full-time job (605). Therefore, 
strategies to improve cognitive function after sepsis are 
important.
We identified four RCTs (513 total patients) eval-
uating therapies designed to cognitive function 
after critical illness or sepsis (613, 627–629). These  
cognition-focused interventions possibly reduced 
prevalence of cognitive impairment at follow-up 
(RR 0.54; 95% CI, 0.29–1.03, low certainty), possibly 
improved global cognitive function using various 
measures (SMD 1.04; 95% CI, 0.73–1.35, low cer -
tainty), and possibly improved physical function and 
mental health-related quality of life. The impact on all 
other outcomes was uncertain, but point estimated fa-
vored the intervention.
Although the point estimates for all outcomes fa-
vored the intervention, the studies were small, and 
both the interventions and outcome measures varied 
across studies. Although the balance of effects prob-
ably favored the intervention, the resources required 
were moderate and the certainty of evidence was very 
low. The panel judged that the potential personnel, 
training, and resource requirements to deliver this in-
tervention warrant higher quality evidence before this 
intervention can be recommended. Therefore, we were 
Prescott et al64     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4unable to issue a recommendation regarding the use of 
cognition-targeted interventions to improve cognitive 
function among survivors of sepsis or septic shock.
Cognitive impairment is common, debilitating, and 
associated with lasting implications for patients’ in-
dependence and quality of life. Given the absence of 
high-quality evidence for interventions to address this 
complication of sepsis, there is a need for studies that 
identify effective and feasible cognition-targeted thera-
pies to facilitate cognitive recovery among adults who 
survive hospitalization for sepsis. Researchers should 
prioritize evaluating the efficacy and cost-effectiveness 
of cognition-targeted therapies after sepsis and septic 
shock.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the important contributions to the 
guideline from members of the patient and family sub-
group, many of whom have lived experience with sepsis 
and have dedicated themselves to improving the care for 
those with sepsis worldwide. Members include Dana 
Mirman, Jennifer Brod, Jackie Duda (Sepsis Alliance 
advisory board member), Mick O’Dowd (Sepsis 
Australia Consumer Partner and Advocacy Program), 
Orlaith Staunton (founder of END SEPSIS, and in 
memory of Rory Staunton), Idelette Numa (coordi-
nator of patient platform Sepsis en daarna/co-founder 
of Sepsis Nederland), and others. We would also like 
to acknowledge the support of the following Society of 
Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) staff members in sup-
porting the guidelines development process, including 
Vishakha Kumar, Hariyali Patel, and Dan Woznica. 
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Prescott 
and Dr. Antonelli, the Co-chairs; Dr. Derde and Dr. 
Rochwerg, the Co-vice-chairs; Dr. Alhazzani and 
Dr. Hylander Møller, the Methods Co-Leads; Dr. De 
Waele, Dr. Gershengorn, Dr. Hodgson, Dr. McIntyre, 
Dr. Mer, and Dr. Oczkowski, the Subgroup Heads; 
and Dr. Alshamsi, Dr. Belley-Cote, Dr. Dionne, Dr. 
Honarmand, Dr. Hylander Møller, and Dr. Nunnally, 
the Subgroup Methods Leads, for their invaluable con-
tributions to the development of the Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign Adult Guidelines. Special thanks also go to 
Dr. Evans and Dr. Kesecioglu, the Conflict of Interest 
Co-Chairs, for overseeing and managing potential 
conflicts of interest to ensure transparency throughout 
the process.These guidelines have been endorsed by the fol-
lowing sponsoring societies: African Federation 
for Emergency Medicine, African Sepsis  
Alliance, American Association of Critical-Care 
Nurses, American College of Chest Physicians 
(CHEST), American Thoracic Society, Asia Pacific 
Sepsis Alliance, Asian Society of Emergency Medicine, 
Association De Medicina Intensiva Brasileira, 
Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society, 
Canadian Critical Care Society, Chinese Society of 
Critical Care Medicine, European Respiratory Society, 
European Society for Emergency Medicine, European 
Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious 
Diseases, with recognition that successful implemen-
tation requires coordinated approaches that align 
sepsis protocols with antimicrobial stewardship objec-
tives at the institutional level, German Sepsis Society, 
Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine, Infectious 
Diseases Society of America, Japanese Society of 
Intensive Care Medicine, Latin American Sepsis 
Institute, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine, 
Society of Hospital Medicine, Surgical Infection 
Society, World Federation of Critical Care Nurses, 
and World Federation of Intensive and Critical Care 
Medicine.
 1 Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI.
 2 VA Center for Clinical Management Research, VA Ann Arbor 
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI.
 3 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, 
Fondazione Poiliclinico Universitario A.Gemelli IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
 4 Medical School, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, 
Italy.
 5 Health Research Center, Ministry of Defense Health 
Services, Riyadh, Saudi Arbia.
 6 Department of Critical Care and Internal Medicine, College 
of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, 
Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
 7 Department of Critical Care, College of Medicine, King 
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
 8 Department of Intensive Care, Copenhagen University 
Hospital—Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
 9 Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
 10 Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Abu 
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
 11 Academic Research Organization, Hospital Israelita Albert 
Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     65 12 Divisions of Cardiology and Critical Care, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 13 Population Health Research Institute, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 14 World Health Research Trust, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 15 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Ghent University 
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
 16 Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.
 17 UMC Utrecht, Intensive Care Center, Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
 18 Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, Utrecht, 
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
 19 Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada.
 20 Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and 
Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 21 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
 22 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine; 
Department of Medicine; University of Miami Miller School 
of Medicine, Miami, FL.
 23 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, NY.
 24 Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Research 
Centre, School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, 
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
 25 Intensive Care Unit, Alfred Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
 26 Division of Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Mackenzie 
Health, Vaughan, ON, Canada.
 27 Division of Critical Care, Department of Medicine, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 28 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
 29 Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.
 30 Division of Critical Care, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.
 31 Divisions of Critical Care and Pulmonology, Department 
of Medicine, Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic 
Hospital and Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
 32 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Care and Pain 
Medicine, New York University, New York, NY.
 33 Department of Emergency Medicine, University College 
Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.
 34 Division of Acute Care Surgical Services, VCU Trauma, 
Richmond, VA.
 35 Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas 
(CONICET), Instituto de Investigación en Medicina y 
Ciencias de la Salud (IIMCS), Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad del Salvador (USAL), Ciudad de Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. 36 Escuela de Enfermería, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad 
del Salvador, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
 37 University of Pittsburgh, Schools of the Health Sciences, 
Pittsburgh, PA.
 38 Intensive Care Department, King Abdulaziz Medical City, 
Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, King Saud Bin 
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King Abdullah 
International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
 39 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Université Paris 
Cité, Paris, France.
 40 Biomedical Sciences Department, Humanitas University, 
Milan, Italy.
 41 IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Milan, Italy.
 42 Department of Emergency Medicine, Manila Doctors 
Hospital, Manila, Philippines.
 43 Department of Emergency Medicine, Corazon Locsin 
Montelibano Memorial Regional Hospital, Bacolod City, 
Philippines.
 44 Department of Emergency Medicine, Southern Philippines 
Medical Center, Davao City, Philippines.
 45 Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
 46 Medical ICU, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
 47 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Kyoto 
University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
 48 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
 49 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL.
 50 Intensive Care Department, SODIR Research Group. 
Hospital Vall d’Hebron. Barcelona, Spain.
 51 Department of Medicine, Universitat Autonoma Barcelona, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.
 52 Department of Critical Care Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 53 Department of Critical Care, Hamilton Health Sciences, 
Hamilton, ON Canada.
 54 Department of Critical Care, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
 55 Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
 56 Department of Emergency, Hôpital Pitié-Salpetriere, 
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, France.
 57 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Division of Pulmonary 
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical 
Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
 58 Section of Hospital Medicine, Division of General Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Boston, MA.
 59 Critical Care Program, The George Institute for Global 
Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
 60 Malcolm Fisher Department of Intensive Care, Royal North 
Shore Hospital, Northern Sydney Local Health District, St 
Leonards, NSW, Australia.
Prescott et al66     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 61 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Ziauddin University, 
Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan.
 62 Department of Intensive Care medicine, Radboud University 
Medical Center Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
 63 Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD.
 64 Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns 
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD.
 65 Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Department of 
Clinical Sciences, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
 66 Walimu, Kampala, Uganda.
 67 Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston, 
MA.
 68 Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, MA.
 69 Department of Anaesthesia, Makerere University College of 
health sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
 70 Section of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
 71 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
 72 Hoag Hospital Memorial Presbyterian, Newport Beach, CA.
 73 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, 
Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI.
 74 Intensive Care Department, Hospital São Paulo, Escola 
Paulista de Medicina Universidade Federal de São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
 75 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Hospital Anchieta 
ICU Complex, Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.
 76 University of Brasília (UnB), Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.
 77 Escola Superior de Ciências da Saúde (ESCS), Brasília, 
Federal District, Brazil.
 78 Bethesda, MD.
 79 Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC.
 80 Section of Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Anesthesiology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC.
 81 School of Public Health, Monash University Victoria, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
 82 Healthcare Improvement Studies Institute, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
 83 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Iowa 
Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA.
 84 Department of Anesthesia Critical Care, University of Iowa 
Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA.
 85 Department of Epidemiology, University of Iowa College of 
Public Health, Iowa City, IA.
 86 Department of Anaesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain, Tata 
Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.
 87 Department of Intensive Care, Guy’s & St Thomas’ Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom. 88 King’s College London, London, United Kingdom.
 89 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, The Queen 
Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
 90 Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
 91 School of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Monash 
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
 92 Institute of Infectious Diseases and Infection Control, Jena 
University Hospital/Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, 
Germany.
 93 Center for Sepsis Care and Control, Jena University 
Hospital/Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany.
 94 University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, 
Faculty of Health Medicine and Behavioural Sciences, 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
 95 Herston Infectious Diseases Institute (HeIDI), Metro North 
Health, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
 96 Division of Anesthesia Critical Care and Emergency and 
Pain Medicine, University of Montpellier, Nimes University 
Hospital, Nimes, France.
 97 Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Moinhos de 
Vento, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
 98 Postgraduate Program in Pneumological Sciences, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
Brazil.
 99 Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
 100 Department of Surgery Kalamazoo, Western Michigan 
University Homer Stryker MD, School of Medicine, MI.
 101 Cooper Research Institute (Critical Care), Camden, NJ.
 102 Cooper Medical School, Rowan University, Camden, NJ.
 103 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, 
University of Kansas, Kansas City, Kansas City, KS.
 104 Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China.
 105 Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
 106 Center for Infection and Molecular Medicine (CIMM), 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
 107 ESCMID Study Group for Bloodstream Infections, 
Endocarditis, and Sepsis (ESGBIES), European Society of 
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID), 
Basel, Switzerland.
 108 Adult Critical Care, St George’s University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
 109 Department of Surgery and Emory Critical Care Center, 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct 
URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the 
HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal’s website 
(http://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal).
Drs. Prescott and Antonelli are co-first authors.
Drs. Rhodes and Coopersmith are co-senior authors.
Dr. Fox-Robichaud reported serving as the scientific director 
of Sepsis Canada and as principal investigator (PI) on a study 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     67funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Dr. Rhodes 
reported serving as an advisor for Maquet. Dr. Kwizera reported 
receiving research support from Fisher and Paykel and Vygon 
and serving as primary author on a trial funded by Wellcome 
Trust. Dr. Du reported serving as president of the Chinese 
Association of Critical Care Physicians and the Chinese College 
of Critical Care Medicine. Dr. Rochwerg reported membership 
on the American Thoracic Society (ATS) guideline committee for 
noninvasive respiratory support and the corticosteroids in sepsis 
guideline committee. Dr. Hodgson reported an executive role 
at Monash Partners, research support from the National Health 
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), and membership on 
the European Respiratory Society/ATS ICU rehabilitation guide-
line committee. Dr. Angus reported serving as a senior editor for 
JAMA. Dr. Azoulay reported receiving lecture fees from Baxter, 
Gilead, Alexion, and Pfizer. Dr. Machado reported serving as PI 
on the NOVA trial funded by Biolab, receiving speaking fees from 
BioMérieux, and serving as an advisor for Baxter. Dr. Prescott re-
ported serving as a consultant for Aurobac Therapeutics. Dr. De 
Waele reported serving as a consultant for Roche Diagnostics. Dr. 
Roberts reported serving as a consultant for BioMérieux and as 
primary author on a study funded by the NHMRC. Dr. McPeake 
reported serving as a consultant for AstraZeneca, with payments 
made to her institution. Dr. Wiersinga reported receiving research 
support from Moderna and serving as PI on a study funded by 
Amsterdam UMC. Dr. Kesecioglu reported receiving lecture 
honoraria from Dräger Medical Equipment. Dr. Doi reported re-
ceiving research support from Nipro and is a Council member of 
the Japanese Society of Intensive Care. Dr. Honarmand reported 
receiving research support from the Lawson Health Research 
Institute and serving on the ATS guideline committee for early 
mobilization. Dr. Evans reported serving as vice-chair of rapid 
response for CHEST and chair of the ABIM council. Dr. Alberto 
reported membership in the World Federation of Critical Care 
Nurses and serving as a reviewer for a systematic review funded 
by Universidad del Salvador. Dr. Heunks reported serving as a 
consultant for Liberate Medical and receiving research support 
from the ATS. Dr. Derde reported involvement in the IMPRINT 
and ECRAID-Base trials; receiving financial and drug contribu-
tions for the REMAP-CAP trial from Roche, Sanofi, SOBI, Faron, 
and Dimerix (all paid to her institution). Dr. Azevedo reported re-
ceiving speaking fees from Baxter, MSD, and Nestle. Dr. Hashmi 
reported membership in Asia Pacific Sepsis Alliance and ISARIC. 
Dr. Nunnally reported serving as co-chair of the Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign Research Committee and participating in activities 
for ASA, AHA, and SOCCA. Dr. Ostermann reported research 
support from Baxter and BioMérieux (paid to her institution) and 
coauthoring articles on hemoadsorption. Dr. Antonelli reported 
serving as an advisor for AstraZeneca, Grifols, Menarini, and 
Shionogi, and as a consultant for Baxter. Dr. Klompas reported 
receiving royalties from UpToDate and research support from the 
AHRQ and CDC. Dr. Gong reported serving as a section editor 
for Wolters Kluwer. Dr. Ego reported serving as vice-chair of the 
Japanese Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Dr. Moller reported 
sponsorship of the EMPRESS RCT. Dr. Leeies reported mem-
bership in the Canadian Critical Care Society and the Canadian 
Society for Transplantation. Dr. Hammond reported receiving re-
search support and IV fluids from Baxter Healthcare. Dr. Mohr 
reported serving as primary author on a study funded by AHRQ 
and HRSA and serving on the board of Society for Academic 
Emergency Medicine. Dr. Ferrer reported receiving speaking fees from Pfizer and owning stock in Grifols. Dr. Rosa reported re-
ceiving grants from the Brazilian Ministry of Health paid to his 
company. Dr. Sawyer reported receiving consultancy fees from 
Molnlycke, Shionogi, and AbbVie and research support from the 
NIH. Dr. Maves reported research support from AiCuris, Biotest, 
Geovax, and Merck (paid to his institution) and serving as a con-
sultant for Shionogi. Dr. Peake reported serving as co-PI on the 
ARISE FLUIDS trial. Dr. Jacob reported serving as PI and CSO 
for the STAIRS study. Dr. Oczkowski reported serving as a con-
sultant for VitalAire. Dr. McGloughlin reported serving as a con-
sultant for the WHO and as clinical director for the Australian 
Living Evidence Collaboration. Dr. Simpson reported serving 
on the editorial board of CHEST SEEK. Dr. Iwashyna reported 
coauthoring the Haines article. Dr. Arabi reported serving as PI 
on the SCREEN trial and chair of the Saudi Critical Care Society 
trials group. Dr. Freund reported serving as PI on the 1BED trial.
Drs. Prescott and Antonelli served as guidelines co-chairs. 
Drs. Alhazzani and Møller served as methods co-leads. Drs. 
Alshamsi, Azevedo, Belley-Cote, De Waele, Derde, Dionne, 
Evans, Gershengorn, Hodgson, Honarmand, Kesecioglu, 
McIntyre, Mer, Nunnally, Oczkowski, Rochwerg served in 
guidelines leadership roles. Akinola, Akuamoah-Boateng, 
Alberto, Angus, Arabi, Azoulay, Cecconi, Convocar, De 
Pascale, Doi, Du, Egi, Elie-Turenne, Ferrer, Fox-Robichaud, 
French, Freund, Gong, Hale, Hammond, Hashmi, Heunks, 
Iwashyna, Jacob, Klompas, Kwizera, Leeies, Lejnieks, Levy, 
Machado, Maia, Masur, Maves, McGloughlin, McPeake, Mohr, 
Myatra, Ostermann, Peake, Pletz, Roberts, Rosa, Sawyer, 
Schorr, Simpson, Weng, and Wiersinga, served as guidelines 
panelists. Drs. Rhodes and Coopersmith served as Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign Leaders.
For information regarding this article, E-mail: 
REFERENCES
 1. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al: The third in-
ternational consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock 
(Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315:801–810
 2. Reinhart K, Daniels R, Kissoon N, et al: Recognizing sepsis 
as a global health priority - A WHO resolution. N Engl J Med 
2017; 377:414–417
 3. Meyer NJ, Prescott HC: Sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J 
Med 2024; 391:2133–2146
 4. Rudd KE, Johnson SC, Agesa KM, et al: Global, regional, 
and national sepsis incidence and mortality, 1990-2017: 
Analysis for the global burden of disease study. Lancet 2020; 
395:200–211
 5. Global Sepsis Alliance. 2030 Global Agenda for 
Sepsis; Making the Next Success Story in Global 
Health. Available at: https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/58a7025b8419c215b30b2df3/t/67d1879b8dbfb0
6f8c3be697/1741784989573/2030_Global_Agenda_for_
Sepsis_Online.pdf. Accessed September 27 , 2025
 6. Collaborators, G.B.D.G.S.: Global, regional, and national sepsis 
incidence and mortality, 1990-2021: A systematic analysis. 
Lancet Glob Health 2025; 13:e2013–e2026
 7 . Prescott HC, Angus DC: Enhancing recovery from sepsis: A 
review. JAMA 2018; 319:62–75
Prescott et al68     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 8. Fleischmann-Struzek C, Born S, Kesselmeier M, et al: 
Functional dependence following intensive care unit-treated 
sepsis: three-year follow-up results from the prospective Mid-
German Sepsis Cohort (MSC). Lancet Reg Health Eur 2024; 
46:101066
 9. Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, Moberg J, et al; GRADE 
Working Group: GRADE evidence to decision (EtD) frame-
works: A systematic and transparent approach to making 
well informed healthcare choices. 1: Introduction. BMJ 2016; 
353:i2016
 10. Santesso N, Glenton C, Dahm P, et al; GRADE Working Group: 
GRADE guidelines 26: Informative statements to communi-
cate the findings of systematic reviews of interventions. J Clin 
Epidemiol 2020; 119:126–135
 11. Guyatt GH, Schünemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, et al: Guideline 
panels should not GRADE good practice statements. J Clin 
Epidemiol 2015; 68:597–600
 12. Guyatt GH, Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, et al: Guideline 
panels should seldom make good practice statements: 
Guidance from the GRADE Working Grou. J Clin Epidemiol 
2016; 80:3–7
 13. Freund Y, Cancella de Abreu M, Lebal S, et al: Effect of the 1-h 
bundle on mortality in patients with suspected sepsis in the 
emergency department: A stepped wedge cluster randomized 
clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50:1086–1095
 14. Arabi YM, Alsaawi A, Alzahrani M, et al; SCREEN Trial 
Group and the Saudi Critical Care Trials Group: Electronic 
sepsis screening among patients admitted to hospital wards: 
A stepped-wedge cluster randomized trial. JAMA 2025; 
333:763–773
 15. Damiani E, Donati A, Serafini G, et al: Effect of performance 
improvement programs on compliance with sepsis bundles 
and mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis of ob-
servational studies. PLoS One 2015; 10:e0125827
 16. Levy MM, Gesten FC, Phillips GS, et al: Mortality changes as-
sociated with mandated public reporting for sepsis. The results 
of the New York state initiative. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2018; 198:1406–1412
 17 . Kahn JM, Davis BS, Yabes JG, et al: Association between 
state-mandated protocolized sepsis care and in-hospital mor-
tality among adults with sepsis. JAMA 2019; 322:240–250
 18. Levy MM, Dellinger RP, Townsend SR, et al: The Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign: Results of an international guideline-based 
performance improvement program targeting severe sepsis. 
Intensive Care Med 2010; 36:222–231
 19. Tarabichi Y, Cheng A, Bar-Shain D, et al: Improving timeliness 
of antibiotic administration using a provider and pharmacist 
facing sepsis early warning system in the emergency depart-
ment setting: A randomized controlled quality improvement in-
itiative. Crit Care Med 2022; 50:418–427
 20. CDC: Hospital Sepsis Program Core Elements. 2023. 
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/media/pdfs/sepsis-
core-elements-H.pdf Accessed August 14, 2025
 21. Prescott HC, Posa PJ, Dantes R: The centers for disease con-
trol and prevention’s hospital sepsis program core elements. 
JAMA 2023; 330:1617–1618
 22. Scheer CS, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Ferrer R, et al; European 
Sepsis Care Study Group: Status of sepsis care in european hospitals: Results from an international cross-sectional survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2025; 211:587–599
 23. Dantes RB, Kaur H, Bouwkamp BA, et al: Sepsis program 
activities in acute care hospitals - national healthcare safety 
network, United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2023; 72:907–911
 24. Schwarzkopf D, Rüddel H, Brinkmann A, et al: The german 
quality network sepsis: evaluation of a quality collaborative on 
decreasing sepsis-related mortality in a controlled interrupted 
time series analysis. Front Med (Lausanne) 2022; 9:882340
 25. Schoffelen T, Papan C, Carrara E, et al; ESCMID Study Group 
for Antimicrobial Stewardship (ESGAP): European society 
of clinical microbiology and infectious diseases guidelines 
for antimicrobial stewardship in emergency departments 
(endorsed by European association of hospital pharmacists). 
Clin Microbiol Infect 2024; 30:1384–1407
 26. Guirgis FW, Jones L, Esma R, et al: Managing sepsis: Electronic 
recognition, rapid response teams, and standardized care save 
lives. J Crit Care 2017; 40:296–302
 27 . Garcia-Lopez L, Grau-Cerrato S, de Frutos-Soto A, et al; 
Grupo de Trabajo Multidisciplinar en Código Sepsis del 
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid: Impact of the im-
plementation of a Sepsis Code hospital protocol in antibiotic 
prescription and clinical outcomes in an intensive care unit. 
Med Intensiva 2017; 41:12–20
 28. Arabi YM, Al-Dorzi HM, Alamry A, et al: The impact of a mul-
tifaceted intervention including sepsis electronic alert system 
and sepsis response team on the outcomes of patients with 
sepsis and septic shock. Ann Intensive Care 2017; 7:57
 29. Peltan ID, Bledsoe JR, Jacobs JR, et al: Effectiveness 
and safety of an emergency department code sepsis pro-
tocol: A pragmatic clinical trial. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2024; 
21:1560–1571
 30. Jones SL, Ashton CM, Kiehne L, et al: Reductions in sepsis 
mortality and costs after design and implementation of a 
nurse-based early recognition and response program. Jt 
Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2015; 41:483–491
 31. Song J, et al: The effect of the intelligent sepsis management 
system on outcomes among patients with sepsis and septic 
shock diagnosed according to the sepsis-3 definition in the 
emergency department. J Clin Med 2019; 8
 32. Shah T, Sterk E, Rech MA: Emergency department sepsis 
screening tool decreases time to antibiotics in patients with 
sepsis. Am J Emerg Med 2018; 36:1745–1748
 33. Champunot R, Kamsawang N, Thimsri D, et al: Effects on out-
come of patients with severe sepsis and septic shock admitted 
to the ICU after implementation cooperative sepsis manage-
ment protocol. Crit Care 2012; 16(Suppl 3):104
 34. Elias R, MacPherson-Dias R, Kurtz A, et al: ICU sepsis response 
team and septic shock mortality: A pre-post intervention study. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199:A7175–A7175
 35. Schinkel M, Holleman F, Vleghels R, et al: The impact of a 
sepsis performance improvement program in the emergency 
department: A before-after intervention study. Infection 2023; 
51:945–954
 36. Rosenqvist M, Fagerstrand E, Lanbeck P, et al: Sepsis alert - 
a triage model that reduces time to antibiotics and length of 
hospital stay. Infect Dis (Lond) 2017; 49:507–513
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     69 37 . McDonald CM, West S, Dushenski D, et al: Sepsis now a pri-
ority: A quality improvement initiative for early sepsis recogni-
tion and care. Int J Qual Health Care 2018; 30:802–809
 38. Threatt DL: Improving sepsis bundle implementation times: 
A nursing process improvement approach. J Nurs Care Qual 
2020; 35:135–139
 39. Rosenqvist M, Bengtsson-Toni M, Tham J, et al: Improved out-
comes after regional implementation of sepsis alert: A novel 
triage model. Crit Care Med 2020; 48:484–490
 40. Roman CP, Dooley M, Nevill A, et al: Introduction of an emer-
gency medicine pharmacist-led sepsis alert response system 
in the emergency department: A cohort study. Emerg Med 
Australas 2023; 35:564–571
 41. Patocka C, Turner J, Xue X, et al: Evaluation of an emergency 
department triage screening tool for suspected severe sepsis 
and septic shock. J Healthc Qual 2014; 36:52–61; quiz 59
 42. Hayden GE, Tuuri RE, Scott R, et al: Triage sepsis alert and 
sepsis protocol lower times to fluids and antibiotics in the ED. 
Am J Emerg Med 2016; 34:1–9
 43. Borrelli G, Koch E, Sterk E, et al: Early recognition of sepsis 
through emergency medical services pre-hospital screening. 
Am J Emerg Med 2019; 37:1428–1432
 44. Troncoso R Jr, Garfinkel EM, Hinson JS, et al: Do prehospital 
sepsis alerts decrease time to complete CMS sepsis meas-
ures? Am J Emerg Med 2023; 71:81–85
 45. Idrees M, Macdonald S, Kodali K: Sepsis early alert tool: Early 
recognition and timely management in the emergency depart-
ment. Emerg Med Australas 2016; 28:399–403
 46. Moore WR, Vermuelen A, Taylor R, et al: Improving 3-hour 
sepsis bundled care outcomes: Implementation of a nurse-
driven sepsis protocol in the emergency department. J Emerg 
Nurs 2019; 45:690–698
 47 . Currie KE, Barry H, Scanlan JM, et al: Impact of a multidiscipli-
nary sepsis huddle in the emergency department. Am J Emerg 
Med 2023; 64:150–154
 48. Petit J, Passerieux J, Maître O, et al; qSOFAST study group: 
Impact of a qSOFA-based triage procedure on antibiotic tim-
ing in ED patients with sepsis: A prospective interventional 
study. Am J Emerg Med 2020; 38:477–484
 49. Austrian JS, Jamin CT, Doty GR, et al: Impact of an emergency 
department electronic sepsis surveillance system on patient 
mortality and length of stay. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2018; 
25:523–529
 50. Williams G, Alberto L, Taha M, et al: The challenges of compli-
ance with sepsis management protocols in low and low-middle 
income countries - A cross-sectional study. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 2025; 90:104032
 51. Pedersen PB, Henriksen DP, Mikkelsen S, et al: Dispatch 
and prehospital transport for acute septic patients: An ob-
servational study. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med 2017; 
25:51
 52. Groenewoudt M, Roest AA, Leijten FMM, et al: Septic patients 
arriving with emergency medical services: A seriously ill popu-
lation. Eur J Emerg Med 2014; 21:330–335
 53. Loza-Gomez A, Hofmann E, NokLam C, et al: Severe sepsis 
and septic shock in patients transported by prehospital serv-
ices versus walk in patients to the emergency department. Am 
J Emerg Med 2021; 45:173–178 54. Lin CB, Peterson ED, Smith EE, et al: Emergency medical ser-
vice hospital prenotification is associated with improved evalu-
ation and treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual Outcomes 2012; 5:514–522
 55. Bradley EH, Herrin J, Wang Y, et al: Strategies for reducing the 
door-to-balloon time in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J 
Med 2006; 355:2308–2320
 56. Smyth MA, Brace-McDonnell SJ, Perkins GD: Identification of 
adults with sepsis in the prehospital environment: A systematic 
review. BMJ Open 2016; 6:e011218
 57 . Oanesa RD, Su TW, Weissman A: Evidence for use of validated 
sepsis screening tools in the prehospital population: A scoping 
review. Prehosp Emerg Care 2024; 28:485–493
 58. Lane D, Ichelson RI, Drennan IR, et al: Prehospital manage-
ment and identification of sepsis by emergency medical serv-
ices: A systematic review. Emerg Med J 2016; 33:408–413
 59. Piedmont S, Goldhahn L, Swart E, et al: Sepsis incidence, sus-
picion, prediction and mortality in emergency medical serv-
ices: A cohort study related to the current international sepsis 
guideline. Infection 2024; 52:1325–1335
 60. Kumar A, Abbenbroek B, Delaney A, et al: Sepsis triggers and 
tools to support early identification in healthcare settings: An 
integrative review. Aust Crit Care 2023; 36:1117–1128
 61. Hunter CL, Silvestri S, Stone A, et al: Prehospital sepsis alert 
notification decreases time to initiation of CMS sepsis core 
measures. Am J Emerg Med 2019; 37:114–117
 62. Guerra WF, Mayfield TR, Meyers MS, et al: Early detection and 
treatment of patients with severe sepsis by prehospital per-
sonnel. J Emerg Med 2013; 44:1116–1125
 63. Mixon M, Dietrich S, Floren M, et al: Time to antibiotic admin-
istration: Sepsis alerts called in emergency department versus 
in the field via emergency medical services. Am J Emerg Med 
2021; 44:291–295
 64. Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna T J, et al: Assessment of clinical 
criteria for sepsis: For the third international consensus defi-
nitions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 
315:762–774
 65. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: International guidelines for management of 
sepsis and septic shock 2021. Intensive Care Med 2021; 
47:1181–1247
 66. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: International guidelines for management of sepsis 
and septic shock 2021. Crit Care Med 2021; 49:e1063–e1143
 67 . Fernando SM, Tran A, Taljaard M, et al: Prognostic accuracy 
of the quick sequential organ failure assessment for mortality 
in patients with suspected infection: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2018; 168:266–275
 68. Herwanto V, Shetty A, Nalos M, et al: Accuracy of quick se-
quential organ failure assessment score to predict sepsis 
mortality in 121 studies including 1,716,017 individuals: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Explor 2019; 
1:e0043
 69. Serafim R, Gomes JA, Salluh J, et al: A comparison of the 
quick-SOFA and systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
criteria for the diagnosis of sepsis and prediction of mor-
tality: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2018; 
153:646–655
Prescott et al70     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 70. Adegbite BR, Edoa JR, Ndzebe Ndoumba WF, et al: A comparison 
of different scores for diagnosis and mortality prediction of adults 
with sepsis in Low-and-Middle-Income Countries: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine 2021; 42:101184
 71. Chua WL, Rusli KDB, Aitken LM: Early warning scores for 
sepsis identification and prediction of in-hospital mortality in 
adults with sepsis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Clin Nurs 2024; 33:2005–2018
 72. Elperin J, Van Perre K, Bryant NH: 1193: Sepsis: Is it time to 
leave sirs behind? A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
sepsis definitions. Crit Care Med 2023; 51:59
 73. Qiu X, Lei Y, Zhou RX: SIRS, SOFA, qSOFA, and NEWS in 
the diagnosis of sepsis and prediction of adverse outcomes: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Expert Rev Anti Infect 
Ther 2023; 21:891–900
 74. Machado FR, Cavalcanti AB, Monteiro MB, et al; Instituto 
Latino-Americano de Sepsis network investigators: Predictive 
accuracy of the quick sepsis-related organ failure assessment 
score in brazil. A prospective multicenter study. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2020; 201:789–798
 75. Islam MM, Nasrin T, Walther BA, et al: Prediction of sepsis 
patients using machine learning approach: A meta-analysis. 
Comput Methods Programs Biomed 2019; 170:1–9
 76. Haas R, McGill SR: Artificial Intelligence for the prediction of 
sepsis in adults. Can J Health Tech 2022; 2 
 77 . Crouser ED, Parrillo JE, Seymour CW, et al: Monocyte distribu-
tion width: A novel indicator of sepsis-2 and sepsis-3 in high-
risk emergency department patients. Crit Care Med 2019; 
47:1018–1025
 78. Crouser ED, Parrillo JE, Seymour C, et al: Improved early de-
tection of sepsis in the ED with a novel monocyte distribution 
width biomarker. Chest 2017; 152:518–526
 79. O’Neal HR Jr, Sheybani R, Kraus CK, et al: Cellular host re-
sponse sepsis test for risk stratification of patients in the 
emergency department: A pooled analysis. Acad Emerg Med 
2024; 31:883–893
 80. O’Neal HR Jr, Sheybani R, Caffery TS, et al: Assessment of a 
cellular host response test to risk-stratify suspected COVID-
19 patients in the emergency department setting. PLoS One 
2022; 17:e0264220
 81. Balk R, Esper AM, Martin GS, et al: Validation of SeptiCyte 
RAPID to discriminate sepsis from non-infectious systemic in-
flammation. J Clin Med 2024; 13:1194
 82. Liesenfeld O, Arora S, Aufderheide TP, et al: Clinical validation 
of an AI-based blood testing device for diagnosis and prognosis 
of acute infection and sepsis. Nat Med 2025; 31:4044–4054 
 83. Bhargava A, López-Espina C, Schmalz L, et al: FDA-authorized 
AI/ML tool for sepsis prediction: Development and validation. 
NEJM AI 2024; 1
 84. Mai B, Zhou L, Wang Q, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of pancre-
atic stone protein in patients with sepsis: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis 2024; 24:472
 85. Martin-Loeches I, Singer M, Leone M: Sepsis: Key insights, 
future directions, and immediate goals. A review and expert 
opinion. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50:2043–2049
 86. Stephen AH, Montoya RL, Aluisio AR: Sepsis and septic shock 
in low- and middle-income countries. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 
2020; 21:571–578 87 . Prescott HC: The epidemiology of sepsis. In: Wersinga WJ, 
Seymour CW, eds. Handbook of sepsis. Cham, Switzerland, 
Springer International Publishing, 2018: 15–28
 88. Lamy B, Dargère S, Arendrup MC, et al: How to optimize 
the use of blood cultures for the diagnosis of blood-
stream infections? A state-of-the art. Front Microbiol  
2016; 7:697
 89. Vashti A, Mullan PJ, Nitzberg M: Single-site sampling strategy 
versus multi-site sampling strategy in blood culture collec-
tion within the hospital setting: A systematic review. Am J 
Infect Control 2025; 53:1113–1120
 90. Ntusi N, Aubin L, Oliver S, et al: Guideline for the optimal use 
of blood cultures. S Afr Med J 2010; 100:839–843
 91. Fabre V, Sharara SL, Salinas AB, et al: Does this patient need 
blood cultures? A scoping review of indications for blood 
cultures in adult nonneutropenic inpatients. Clin Infect Dis 
2020; 71:1339–1347
 92. Papavarnavas NS, et al.: Practice update to optimise the per-
formance and interpretation of blood cultures: 2022. S Afr 
Med J 2022; 112:397–402
 93. S3-Leitlinie: Sepsis – Prävention, Diagnose, Therapie 
und Nachsorge – Update 2025. Available at: https://reg-
ister.awmf.org/assets/guidelines/079-001l_S3_Sepsis-
Praevention-Diagnose-Therapie-Nachsorge_2025-07 .pdf 
Accessed August 12, 2025
 94. Miller JM, Binnicker MJ, Campbell S, et al: A guide to utiliza-
tion of the microbiology laboratory for diagnosis of infectious 
diseases: 2018 update by the infectious diseases society 
of America and the American society for microbiology. Clin 
Infect Dis 2018; 67:813–816
 95. Towns ML, Jarvis WR, Hsueh PR: Guidelines on blood cul-
tures. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2010; 43:347–349
 96. Weinstein MP, Reller LB, Murphy JR, et al: The clinical sig-
nificance of positive blood cultures: A comprehensive anal-
ysis of 500 episodes of bacteremia and fungemia in adults. 
I. Laboratory and epidemiologic observations. Rev Infect Dis 
1983; 5:35–53
 97 . Grohs P, Mainardi J-L, Podglajen I, et al: Relevance of rou-
tine use of the anaerobic blood culture bottle. J Clin Microbiol 
2007; 45:2711–2715
 98. Lafaurie M, d'Anglejan E, Donay JL, et al: Utility of anaerobic 
bottles for the diagnosis of bloodstream infections. BMC 
Infect Dis 2020; 20:142
 99. Chandler MT, Morton ES, Byrd RP, et al: Reevaluation of an-
aerobic blood cultures in a Veteran population. South Med J 
2000; 93:986–988
 100. Yarahmadi S, Ebrahimzadeh F, Mohamadipour F, et al: Effect 
of prone position on clinical outcomes of nonintubated 
patients with COVID-19: A randomised clinical trial. Collegian 
2023; 30:449–456
 101. Cheng MP, Stenstrom R, Paquette K, et al; FABLED 
Investigators: Blood culture results before and after anti-
microbial administration in patients with severe manifesta-
tions of sepsis: A diagnostic study. Ann Intern Med 2019; 
171:547–554
 102. Liu C, Bayer A, Cosgrove SE, et al: Clinical practice guide-
lines by the infectious diseases society of America for the 
treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     71infections in adults and children: Executive summary. Clin 
Infect Dis 2011; 52:285–292
 103. Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes DR, et al: Clinical practice 
guideline for the management of candidiasis: 2016 update 
by the infectious diseases society of America. Clin Infect Dis 
2016; 62:e1–50
 104. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: International guidelines for management of 
sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med 2017; 
43:304–377
 105. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: international guidelines for management 
of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Crit Care Med 2017; 
45:486–552
 106. Liu V, Morehouse JW, Soule J, et al: Fluid volume, lactate 
values, and mortality in sepsis patients with intermediate lac-
tate values. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2013; 10:466–473
 107 . Shankar-Hari M, Phillips GS, Levy ML, et al; Sepsis 
Definitions Task Force: Developing a new definition and 
assessing new clinical criteria for septic shock: For the third 
international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic 
shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315:775–787
 108. Liu VX, Morehouse JW, Marelich GP, et al: Multicenter imple-
mentation of a treatment bundle for patients with sepsis and 
intermediate lactate values. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016; 
193:1264–1270
 109. Kuttab HI, Lykins JD, Hughes MD, et al: Evaluation 
and predictors of fluid resuscitation in patients with 
severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 2019; 
47:1582–1590
 110. Corl KA, Levy MM, Holder AL, et al: Moderate IV fluid re-
suscitation is associated with decreased sepsis mortality. Crit 
Care Med 2024; 52:e557–e567
 111. Peake SL, Delaney A, Bellomo R; ARISE Investigators: Goal-
directed resuscitation in septic shock. N Engl J Med 2015; 
372:190–191
 112. Pro CI, et al.: A randomized trial of protocol-based care for 
early septic shock. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:1683–1693
 113. Mouncey PR, Osborn TM, Power GS, et al; ProMISe Trial 
Investigators: Trial of early, goal-directed resuscitation for 
septic shock. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:1301–1311
 114. Investigators P, et al.: Early, goal-directed therapy for septic 
shock - A patient-level meta-analysis. N Engl J Med 2017; 
376:2223–2234
 115. Ward MA, Kuttab HI, Badgett RG: The effect of early fluid 
resuscitation on mortality in sepsis: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2025; 53:e1790–e1802
 116. Taylor SP, Karvetski CH, Templin MA, et al: Initial fluid resus-
citation following adjusted body weight dosing is associated 
with improved mortality in obese patients with suspected 
septic shock. J Crit Care 2018; 43:7–12
 117 . Lemmens HJ, Bernstein D, Brodsky JB: Estimating blood 
volume in obese and morbidly obese patients. Obes Surg 
2006; 16:773–776
 118. Anderson MR, Shashaty MGS: Impact of obesity in critical 
illness. Chest 2021; 160:2135–2145
 119. Gendreau S, Frapard T, Carteaux G, et al: Geo-economic 
influence on the effect of fluid volume for sepsis resuscitation: A meta-analysis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2024; 209:517–528
 120. Morton B, Stolbrink M, Kagima W, et al: The early recognition 
and management of sepsis in sub-saharan African adults: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 2018; 15:2017
 121. Andrews B, Semler MW, Muchemwa L, et al: Effect of an 
early resuscitation protocol on in-hospital mortality among 
adults with sepsis and hypotension: A randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA 2017; 318:1233–1240
 122. Andrews B, Muchemwa L, Kelly P, et al: Simplified severe 
sepsis protocol: a randomized controlled trial of modified 
early goal-directed therapy in Zambia. Crit Care Med 2014; 
42:2315–2324
 122a. Devine BJ: Gentamicin therapy. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1974; 
8:650
 123. Mekontso Dessap A, AlShamsi F, Belletti A, et al; European 
Society of Intensive Care Medicine: European Society of 
Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) 2025 clinical practice 
guideline on fluid therapy in adult critically ill patients: Part 
2-the volume of resuscitation fluids. Intensive Care Med 
2025; 51:461–477
 124. Ahn C, Yu G, Shin TG, et al: Comparison of early and late 
norepinephrine administration in patients with septic shock: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2024; 
166:1417–1430
 125. Permpikul C, Tongyoo S, Viarasilpa T, et al: Early use of norepi-
nephrine in septic shock resuscitation (CENSER). A random-
ized trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199:1097–1105
 126. Varpula M, Tallgren M, Saukkonen K, et al: Hemodynamic 
variables related to outcome in septic shock. Intensive Care 
Med 2005; 31:1066–1071
 127 . Shi R, Braïk R, Monnet X, et al: Early norepinephrine for 
patients with septic shock: An updated systematic review 
and meta-analysis with trial sequential analysis. Crit Care 
2025; 29:182
 128. Li Y, Li H, Zhang D: Timing of norepinephrine initiation in 
patients with septic shock: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Crit Care 2020; 24:488
 129. Zhou HX, Yang C-F, Wang H-Y, et al: Should we initiate vaso-
pressors earlier in patients with septic shock: A mini sys-
temic review. World J Crit Care Med 2023; 12:204–216
 130. Elbouhy MA, Soliman M, Gaber A, et al: Early use of norepi-
nephrine improves survival in septic shock: Earlier than early. 
Arch Med Res 2019; 50:325–332
 131. Bai X, Yu W, Ji W, et al: Early versus delayed administration of 
norepinephrine in patients with septic shock. Crit Care 2014; 
18:532
 132. Colon Hidalgo D, Patel J, Masic D, et al: Delayed vasopressor 
initiation is associated with increased mortality in patients 
with septic shock. J Crit Care 2020; 55:145–148
 133. National Heart L, et al.: Early restrictive or liberal fluid man-
agement for sepsis-induced hypotension. N Engl J Med 
2023; 388:499–510
 134. Owen VS, Rosgen BK, Cherak SJ, et al: Adverse events 
associated with administration of vasopressor medications 
through a peripheral intravenous catheter: A systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2021; 25:146
Prescott et al72     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 135. Tian DH, Smyth C, Keijzers G, et al: Safety of peripheral ad-
ministration of vasopressor medications: A systematic re-
view. Emerg Med Australas 2020; 32:220–227
 136. Greenwald HP, Gootnick A, Luger NM, et al: Tissue necrosis 
following subcutaneous infiltration with nor-epinephrine; re-
port of two cases. N Engl J Med 1952; 246:252–253
 137 . Munroe ES, Weinstein J, Gershengorn HB, et al: 
Understanding how clinicians personalize fluid and vaso-
pressor decisions in early sepsis management. JAMA Netw 
Open 2024; 7:e247480
 138. Munroe E, Claar D, Tamae-Kakazu M, et al: Hospital policies 
on intravenous vasopressor administration and monitoring: 
A survey of michigan hospitals. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2022; 
19:1769–1772
 139. Ricard JD, Salomon L, Boyer A, et al: Central or periph-
eral catheters for initial venous access of ICU patients: 
A randomized controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2013; 
41:2108–2115
 140. Stolz A, Efendy R, Apte Y, et al: Safety and efficacy of pe-
ripheral versus centrally administered vasopressor infusion: 
A single-centre retrospective observational study. Aust Crit 
Care 2022; 35:506–511
 141. Delaney A, Finnis M, Bellomo R, et al: Initiation of vasopressor 
infusions via peripheral versus central access in patients with 
early septic shock: A retrospective cohort study. Emerg Med 
Australas 2020; 32:210–219
 142. Munroe ES, Heath ME, Eteer M, et al: Use and outcomes 
of peripheral vasopressors in early sepsis-induced hypoten-
sion across michigan hospitals: A retrospective cohort study. 
Chest 2024; 165:847–857
 143. Munroe ES, Co IN, Douglas I, et al; NHLBI PETAL Network: 
Peripheral vasopressor use in early sepsis-induced hypoten-
sion. JAMA Netw Open 2025; 8:e2529148
 144. Asher E, Karameh H, Nassar H, et al; Jerusalem Platelets 
Thrombosis and Intervention in Cardiology (JUPITER-16) 
Study Group: Safety and outcomes of peripherally admin-
istered vasopressor infusion in patients admitted with shock 
to an intensive cardiac care unit-A single-center prospective 
study. J Clin Med 2023; 12:5734
 145. Groetzinger LM, Williams J, Svec S, et al: Peripherally infused 
norepinephrine to avoid central venous catheter placement in 
a medical intensive care unit: A pilot study. Ann Pharmacother 
2022; 56:773–781
 146. Medlej K, Kazzi AA, El Hajj Chehade A, et al: Complications 
from administration of vasopressors through peripheral ve-
nous catheters: An observational study. J Emerg Med 2018; 
54:47–53
 147 . Munroe ES: A case for the evidence-based use of peripheral 
vasopressors. Chest 2024; 165:236–238
 148. Chopra V, Flanders SA, Saint S, et al; Michigan 
Appropriateness Guide for Intravenouse Catheters (MAGIC) 
Panel: The michigan appropriateness guide for intravenous 
catheters (MAGIC): Results from a multispecialty panel 
using the RAND/UCLA appropriateness method. Ann Intern 
Med 2015; 163(6 Suppl):S1–40
 149. LeDoux D, Astiz ME, Carpati CM, et al: Effects of perfusion 
pressure on tissue perfusion in septic shock. Crit Care Med 
2000; 28:2729–2732 150. Meng L, Wang Y, Zhang L, et al: Heterogeneity and var-
iability in pressure autoregulation of organ blood flow: 
lessons learned over 100+ years. Crit Care Med 2019; 
47:436–448
 151. Asfar P, Meziani F, Hamel J-F, et al; SEPSISPAM Investigators: 
High versus low blood-pressure target in patients with septic 
shock. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:1583–1593
 152. Hylands M, Moller MH, Asfar P, et al: A systematic review of 
vasopressor blood pressure targets in critically ill adults with 
hypotension. Can J Anaesth 2017; 64:703–715
 153. Lamontagne F, Richards-Belle A, Thomas K, et al; 65 trial 
investigators: Effect of reduced exposure to vasopressors on 
90-day mortality in older critically ill patients with vasodil-
atory hypotension: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020; 
323:938–949
 154. Angriman F, Momenzade N, Adhikari NKJ, et al: Blood 
pressure targets for adults with vasodilatory shock - An 
individual patient data meta-analysis. NEJM Evid 2025; 
4:EVIDoa2400359
 155. Endo A, Yamakawa K, Tagami T, et al; OPTPRESS trial inves-
tigators: Efficacy of targeting high mean arterial pressure for 
older patients with septic shock (OPTPRESS): A multicentre, 
pragmatic, open-label, randomised controlled trial. Intensive 
Care Med 2025; 51:883–892
 156. Misango D, Pattnaik R, Baker T, et al; Global Intensive Care 
Working Group: Haemodynamic assessment and support in 
sepsis and septic shock in resource-limited settings. Trans R 
Soc Trop Med Hyg 2017; 111:483–489
 157 . Ferrer R, Artigas A, Suarez D, et al; Edusepsis Study Group: 
Effectiveness of treatments for severe sepsis: A prospective, 
multicenter, observational study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2009; 180:861–866
 158. Kalil AC, Johnson DW, Lisco SJ, et al: Early goal-directed 
therapy for sepsis: A novel solution for discordant survival 
outcomes in clinical trials. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:607–614
 159. Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC, et al: Time to treatment 
and mortality during mandated emergency care for sepsis. N 
Engl J Med 2017; 376:2235–2244
 160. Klompas M, Calandra T, Singer M: Antibiotics for sepsis- 
finding the equilibrium. JAMA 2018; 320:1433–1434
 161. Prescott HC, Iwashyna T J: Improving sepsis treatment by 
embracing diagnostic uncertainty. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2019; 
16:426–429
 162. Slimings C, Riley TV: Antibiotics and healthcare facility- 
associated Clostridioides difficile infection: Systematic review 
and meta-analysis 2020 update. J Antimicrob Chemother 
2021; 76:1676–1688
 163. Tamma PD, Avdic E, Li DX, et al: Association of adverse 
events with antibiotic use in hospitalized patients. JAMA 
Intern Med 2017; 177:1308–1315
 164. Klein Klouwenberg PM, Cremer OL, van Vught LA, et al: 
Likelihood of infection in patients with presumed sepsis at 
the time of intensive care unit admission: A cohort study. Crit 
Care 2015; 19:319
 165. Heffner AC, Horton JM, Marchick MR, et al: Etiology of 
illness in patients with severe sepsis admitted to the hos-
pital from the emergency department. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 
50:814–820
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     73 166. Contou D, Roux D, Jochmans S, et al: Septic shock with no 
diagnosis at 24 hours: a pragmatic multicenter prospective 
cohort study. Crit Care 2016; 20:360
 167 . Shappell CN, Yu T, Klompas M, et al: Frequency of antibiotic 
overtreatment and associated harms in patients presenting 
with suspected sepsis to the emergency department: A ret-
rospective cohort study. Clin Infect Dis 2025; 80:1197–1207
 168. Hooper GA, Klippel CJ, McLean SR, et al: Concordance be-
tween initial presumptive and final adjudicated diagnoses 
of infection among patients meeting sepsis-3 criteria in the 
emergency department. Clin Infect Dis 2023; 76:2047–2055
 169. Prescott HC, Seelye S, Wang XQ, et al: Temporal trends in 
antimicrobial prescribing during hospitalization for potential 
infection and sepsis. JAMA Intern Med 2022; 182:805–813
 170. Leung L Y, Huang H-L, Hung KK, et al: Door-to-antibiotic 
time and mortality in patients with sepsis: Systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Eur J Intern Med 2024; 129:48–61
 171. Pak TR, Young J, McKenna CS, et al: Risk of misleading 
conclusions in observational studies of time-to-antibiotics 
and mortality in suspected sepsis. Clin Infect Dis 2023; 
77:1534–1543
 172. Hechtman RK, Kipnis P, Cano J, et al: Heterogeneity of ben-
efit from earlier time-to-antibiotics for sepsis. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2024; 209:852–860
 173. Alam N, Oskam E, Stassen PM, et al; PHANTASi Trial Investigators 
and the ORCA (Onderzoeks Consortium Acute Geneeskunde) 
Research Consortium the Netherlands: Prehospital antibiotics in 
the ambulance for sepsis: A multicentre, open label, randomised 
trial. Lancet Respir Med 2018; 6:40–50
 174. Chalya PL, Mabula JB, Koy M, et al: T yphoid intestinal per-
forations at a University teaching hospital in Northwestern 
Tanzania: A surgical experience of 104 cases in a resource-
limited setting. World J Emerg Surg 2012; 7:4
 175. Phua J, Koh Y, Du B, et al; MOSAICS Study Group: 
Management of severe sepsis in patients admitted to Asian 
intensive care units: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2011; 
342:d3245
 176. Thwaites, C.L., et al., Infection Management in Patients with 
Sepsis and Septic Shock in Resource-Limited Settings. 
in Sepsis Management in Resource-limited Settings, A.M. 
Dondorp, M.W. Dunser, and M.J. Schultz, eds. Cham, CH, 
2019: 163–84
 177 . Urayeneza O, Mujyarugamba P, Rukemba Z, et al; Sepsis 
in Resource-Limited Nations Workgroup of the Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign: Increasing evidence-based interventions 
in patients with acute infections in a resource-limited setting: 
A before-and-after feasibility trial in Gitwe, Rwanda. Crit Care 
Med 2018; 46:1357–1366
 178. Yokota PK, Marra AR, Martino MDV, et al: Impact of appro-
priate antimicrobial therapy for patients with severe sepsis 
and septic shock--a quality improvement study. PLoS One 
2014; 9:e104475
 179. Abdu M, Wilson A, Mhango C, et al: Resource availability for 
the management of maternal sepsis in Malawi, other low-
income countries, and lower-middle-income countries. Int J 
Gynaecol Obstet 2018; 140:175–183
 180. Baelani I, Jochberger S, Laimer T, et al: Availability of critical 
care resources to treat patients with severe sepsis or septic shock in Africa: A self-reported, continent-wide survey of an-
aesthesia providers. Crit Care 2011; 15:R10
 181. Bataar O, Lundeg G, Tsenddorj G, et al; Helfen Berührt Study 
Team: Nationwide survey on resource availability for imple-
menting current sepsis guidelines in Mongolia. Bull World 
Health Organ 2010; 88:839–846
 182. Machado FR, Cavalcanti AB, Bozza FA, et al; SPREAD 
Investigators: The epidemiology of sepsis in Brazilian in-
tensive care units (the Sepsis PREvalence Assessment 
Database, SPREAD): An observational study. Lancet Infect 
Dis 2017; 17:1180–1189
 183. Taniguchi LU, Azevedo Luciano Cesar Pontes de, Bozza 
FA, et al: Availability of resources to treat sepsis in Brazil: 
A random sample of Brazilian institutions. Rev Bras Ter 
Intensiva 2019; 31:193–201
 184. Thwaites L, Nasa P, Abbenbroek B, et al: Management of 
adult sepsis in resource-limited settings: Global expert con-
sensus statements using a Delphi method. Intensive Care 
Med 2025; 51:21–38
 185. Girotra S, Dukes KC, Sperling J, et al: Emergency medical 
service agency practices and cardiac arrest survival. JAMA 
Cardiol 2024; 9:683–691
 186. Muchnok D, Vargo A, Deeb A-P, et al: Association of pre-
hospital needle decompression with mortality among injured 
patients requiring emergency chest decompression. JAMA 
Surg 2022; 157:934–940
 187 . Nakayama N, Yamamoto T, Kikuchi M, et al; Japan Resuscitation 
Council (JRC) Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) Task Force 
and the Guideline Editorial Committee on behalf of the 
Japanese Circulation Society (JCS) Emergency and Critical 
Care Committee: Prehospital administration of aspirin and nitro-
glycerin for patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome 
- A systematic review. Circ Rep 2022; 4:449–457
 188. Philipsen SPJ, Vergunst AA, Tan E: Traction splinting for mid-
shaft femoral fractures in the pre-hospital and emergency 
department environment-A systematic review. Injury 2022; 
53:4129–4138
 189. Varney J, Motawea KR, Kandil OA, et al: Prehospital admin-
istration of broad-spectrum antibiotics for sepsis patients: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Sci Rep 2022; 
5:e582
 190. Poynter MJ, Farrugia A, Kelly E, et al: Prehospital adminis-
tration of antibiotics in addition to usual care versus usual 
care alone for patients with suspected sepsis – a systematic 
review. Paramedicine 2023; 21:52–65
 191. Jones J, Allen S, Davies J, et al: Randomised feasibility study 
of prehospital recognition and antibiotics for emergency 
patients with sepsis (PhRASe). Sci Rep 2021; 11:18586
 192. Chamberlain D: Prehospital administered intravenous antimi-
crobial protocol for septic shock: A prospective randomized 
clinical trial. Crit Care 2009; 13(Suppl 1):P317
 193. Kotnarin R, Sirinawee P, Supasaovapak J: Impact of prehos-
pital antibiotics on in-hospital mortality in emergency medical 
service patients with sepsis. Open Access Emerg Med 2023; 
15:199–206
 194. Seymour CW, Kahn JM, Martin-Gill C, et al: Delays From First 
Medical Contact to Antibiotic Administration for Sepsis. Crit 
Care Med 2017; 45:759–765
Prescott et al74     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 195. Lagunes L, Encina B, Ramirez-Estrada S: Current under-
standing in source control management in septic shock 
patients: a review. Ann Transl Med 2016; 4:330
 196. Jimenez MF, Marshall JC, International Sepsis F: Source 
control in the management of sepsis. Intensive Care Med 
2001; 27(Suppl 1):S49–S62
 197 . De Waele JJ, Girardis M, Martin-Loeches I: Source control in 
the management of sepsis and septic shock. Intensive Care 
Med 2022; 48:1799–1802
 198. Azuhata T, Kinoshita K, Kawano D, et al: Time from admission 
to initiation of surgery for source control is a critical determi-
nant of survival in patients with gastrointestinal perforation 
with associated septic shock. Crit Care 2014; 18:R87
 199. Bloos F, Thomas-Rüddel D, Rüddel H, et al; MEDUSA Study 
Group: Impact of compliance with infection management 
guidelines on outcome in patients with severe sepsis: A pro-
spective observational multi-center study. Crit Care 2014; 
18:R42
 200. Bloos F, Rüddel H, Thomas-Rüddel D, et al; MEDUSA 
study group: Effect of a multifaceted educational inter-
vention for anti-infectious measures on sepsis mortality: 
A cluster randomized trial. Intensive Care Med 2017; 
43:1602–1612
 201. De Pascale G, Antonelli M, Deschepper M, et al; Abdominal 
Sepsis Study (AbSeS) group and the Trials Group of the 
European Society of Intensive Care Medicine: Poor timing 
and failure of source control are risk factors for mortality in 
critically ill patients with secondary peritonitis. Intensive Care 
Med 2022; 48:1593–1606
 202. Karvellas CJ, Dong V, Abraldes JG, et al: The impact of 
delayed source control and antimicrobial therapy in 196 
patients with cholecystitis-associated septic shock: A cohort 
analysis. Can J Surg 2019; 62:189–198
 203. Kim H, Chung SP, Choi S-H, et al; Korean Shock Society 
(KoSS) Investigators: Impact of timing to source control in 
patients with septic shock: A prospective multi-center obser-
vational study. J Crit Care 2019; 53:176–182
 204. Martinez ML, Ferrer R, Torrents E, et al; Edusepsis Study 
Group: Impact of source control in patients with severe 
sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:11–19
 205. Naqvi F, Jain P, Umer A, et al: Outcomes of patients with 
sepsis and septic shock requiring source control: A prospec-
tive observational single-center study. Crit Care Explor 2022; 
4:e0807
 206. Onal U, Akyol Seyhan D, Ketenoğlu OB, et al: Importance of 
source control in the subgroup of intra-abdominal infections 
for septic shock patients: Analysis of 390 cases. Mediterr J 
Hematol Infect Dis 2024; 16:e2024051
 207 . Reitz KM, Kennedy J, Li SR, et al: Association between time 
to source control in sepsis and 90-day mortality. JAMA Surg 
2022; 157:817–826
 208. Ruddel H, Thomas-Rüddel DO, Reinhart K, et al; MEDUSA 
study group: Adverse effects of delayed antimicrobial treat-
ment and surgical source control in adults with sepsis: 
Results of a planned secondary analysis of a cluster- 
randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2022; 26:51
 209. Solomkin JS, Mazuski JE, Bradley JS, et al: Diagnosis and 
management of complicated intra-abdominal infection 
in adults and children: guidelines by the surgical infection society and the infectious diseases society of America. Clin 
Infect Dis 2010; 50:133–164
 210. Huston JM, Barie PS, Dellinger EP, et al; Therapeutics and 
Guidelines Committee: The surgical infection society guide-
lines on the management of intra-abdominal infection: 2024 
update. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2024; 25:419–435
 211. Coccolini F, Sartelli M, Sawyer R, et al: Source control in 
emergency general surgery: WSES, GAIS, SIS-E, SIS-A 
guidelines. World J Emerg Surg 2023; 18:41
 212. Duane TM, Huston JM, Collom M, et al: Surgical infection so-
ciety 2020 updated guidelines on the management of com-
plicated skin and soft tissue infections. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 
2021; 22:383–399
 213. Kranz J, Bartoletti R, Bruyère F, et al: European association 
of urology guidelines on urological infections: Summary of 
the 2024 guidelines. Eur Urol 2024; 86:27–41
 214. Bodilsen J, D'Alessandris QG, Humphreys H, et al; 
ESCMID Study Group for Infections of the Brain (ESGIB): 
European society of clinical microbiology and infectious 
diseases guidelines on diagnosis and treatment of brain 
abscess in children and adults. Clin Microbiol Infect 2024; 
30:66–89
 215. Magiorakos AP, Srinivasan A, Carey RB, et al: Multidrug-
resistant, extensively drug-resistant and pandrug-resistant 
bacteria: An international expert proposal for interim standard 
definitions for acquired resistance. Clin Microbiol Infect 2012; 
18:268–281
 216. Paul M, Carrara E, Retamar P, et al: European society of 
clinical microbiology and infectious diseases (ESCMID) 
guidelines for the treatment of infections caused by  
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli (endorsed by 
European society of intensive care medicine). Clin Microbiol 
Infect 2022; 28:521–547
 217 . Vincent JL, Sakr Y, Singer M, et al; EPIC III Investigators: 
Prevalence and outcomes of infection among patients in in-
tensive care units in 2017 . JAMA 2020; 323:1478–1487
 218. Rhee C, Kadri SS, Dekker JP, et al; CDC Prevention 
Epicenters Program: Prevalence of antibiotic-resistant 
pathogens in culture-proven sepsis and outcomes associ-
ated with inadequate and broad-spectrum empiric antibiotic 
use. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3:e202899
 219. Liu X, Liu Xi, Jin C, et al: Prediction models for diagnosis 
and prognosis of the colonization or infection of multidrug-
resistant organisms in adults: A systematic review, critical 
appraisal, and meta-analysis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2024; 
30:1364–1373
 220. Aliberti S, Reyes LF, Faverio P, et al; GLIMP investigators: 
Global initiative for meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
pneumonia (GLIMP): An international, observational cohort 
study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 16:1364–1376
 221. Labricciosa FM, Sartelli M, Abbo LM, et al: Epidemiology and 
risk factors for isolation of multi-drug-resistant organisms in 
patients with complicated intra-abdominal infections. Surg 
Infect (Larchmt) 2018; 19:264–272
 222. Callejo-Torre F, Eiros Bouza JM, Olaechea Astigarraga P, et 
al: Risk factors for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus au-
reus colonisation or infection in intensive care units and their 
reliability for predicting MRSA on ICU admission. Infez Med 
2016; 24:201–209
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     75 223. Aydemir H, Akduman D, Piskin N, et al: Colistin vs. the combina-
tion of colistin and rifampicin for the treatment of carbapenem- 
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii ventilator-associated 
pneumonia. Epidemiol Infect 2013; 141:1214–1222
 224. Wagenlehner FM, Umeh O, Steenbergen J, et al: Ceftolozane-
tazobactam compared with levofloxacin in the treatment of 
complicated urinary-tract infections, including pyelonephritis: 
A randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial (ASPECT-cUTI). 
Lancet 2015; 385:1949–1956
 225. Solomkin J, Hershberger E, Miller B, et al: Ceftolozane/tazo-
bactam plus metronidazole for complicated intra-abdominal 
infections in an era of multidrug resistance: Results from a 
randomized, double-blind, phase 3 trial (ASPECT-cIAI). Clin 
Infect Dis 2015; 60:1462–1471
 226. Seo YB, Lee J, Kim YK, et al: Randomized controlled trial 
of piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime and ertapenem for the 
treatment of urinary tract infection caused by extended-
spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli. BMC 
Infect Dis 2017; 17:404
 227 . Carmeli Y, Armstrong J, Laud PJ, et al: Ceftazidime-avibactam 
or best available therapy in patients with ceftazidime-resistant 
Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa compli-
cated urinary tract infections or complicated intra-abdominal 
infections (REPRISE): A randomised, pathogen-directed, 
phase 3 study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 16:661–673
 228. Wunderink RG, Matsunaga Y, Ariyasu M, et al: Cefiderocol 
versus high-dose, extended-infusion meropenem for 
the treatment of Gram-negative nosocomial pneumonia 
(APEKS-NP): A randomised, double-blind, phase 3, non-
inferiority trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2021; 21:213–225
 229. Wunderink RG, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Rahav G, et al: 
Effect and safety of meropenem-vaborbactam versus best-
available therapy in patients with carbapenem-resistant 
enterobacteriaceae infections: The TANGO II randomized 
clinical trial. Infect Dis Ther 2018; 7:439–455
 230. Wagenlehner FM, Sobel JD, Newell P, et al: Ceftazidime-
avibactam versus doripenem for the treatment of compli-
cated urinary tract infections, including acute pyelonephritis: 
RECAPTURE, a phase 3 randomized trial program. Clin 
Infect Dis 2016; 63:754–762
 231. Portsmouth S, van Veenhuyzen D, Echols R, et al: Cefiderocol 
versus imipenem-cilastatin for the treatment of complicated 
urinary tract infections caused by Gram-negative uropatho-
gens: A phase 2, randomised, double-blind, non-inferiority 
trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2018; 18:1319–1328
 232. Bassetti M, Echols R, Matsunaga Y, et al: Efficacy and safety 
of cefiderocol or best available therapy for the treatment of 
serious infections caused by carbapenem-resistant Gram-
negative bacteria (CREDIBLE-CR): A randomised, open-
label, multicentre, pathogen-focused, descriptive, phase 3 
trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2021; 21:226–240
 233. Carey GB, Holleck JL, Ein Alshaeba S, et al: Estimated mor-
tality with early empirical antibiotic coverage of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus in hospitalized patients with 
bacterial infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
J Antimicrob Chemother 2023; 78:1150–1159
 234. Jernigan JA, Hatfield KM, Wolford H, et al: Multidrug-
resistant bacterial infections in U.S. hospitalized patients, 
2012-2017 . N Engl J Med 2020; 382:1309–1319 235. Collaborators, G.B.D.A.R.: Global burden of bacterial antimi-
crobial resistance 1990-2021: A systematic analysis with 
forecasts to 2050. Lancet 2024; 404:1199–1226
 236. Rhee C, Chen T, Kadri SS, et al; CDC Prevention Epicenters 
Program: Trends in empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic use for 
suspected community-onset sepsis in US hospitals. JAMA 
Netw Open 2024; 7:e2418923
 237 . Tamma PD, Heil EL, Justo JA, Mathers AJ, Satlin MJ, Bonomo 
RA: Infectious diseases society of America 2024 guidance 
on the treatment of antimicrobial-resistant gram-negative 
infections. Clin Infect Dis 2024; 7:ciae403
 238. Bassetti M, Righi E, Ansaldi F, et al: A multicenter study of 
septic shock due to candidemia: Outcomes and predictors of 
mortality. Intensive Care Med 2014; 40:839–845
 239. Kollef M, Micek S, Hampton N, et al: Septic shock attrib-
uted to Candida infection: Importance of empiric therapy and 
source control. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:1739–1746
 240. Magill SS, Edwards JR, Bamberg W, et al; Emerging 
Infections Program Healthcare-Associated Infections and 
Antimicrobial Use Prevalence Survey Team: Multistate point-
prevalence survey of health care-associated infections. N 
Engl J Med 2014; 370:1198–1208
 241. Mean M, Marchetti O, Calandra T: Bench-to-bedside review: 
Candida infections in the intensive care unit. Crit Care 2008; 
12:204
 242. Garey KW, Rege M, Pai MP, et al: Time to initiation of fluco-
nazole therapy impacts mortality in patients with candidemia: 
A multi-institutional study. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43:25–31
 243. Marriott DJ, Playford EG, Chen S, et al; Australian 
Candidaemia Study: Determinants of mortality in non- 
neutropenic ICU patients with candidaemia. Crit Care 2009; 
13:R115
 244. Morrell M, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH: Delaying the empiric 
treatment of Candida bloodstream infection until positive 
blood culture results are obtained: A potential risk factor 
for hospital mortality. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005; 
49:3640–3645
 245. Thomas-Ruddel DO, Schlattmann P, Pletz M, et al: Risk fac-
tors for invasive Candida infection in critically ill patients: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2022; 
161:345–355
 246. Cortegiani A, Russotto V, Maggiore A, et al: Antifungal 
agents for preventing fungal infections in non-neutropenic 
critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 
2016:CD004920
 247 . Timsit JF, Azoulay E, Schwebel C, et al; EMPIRICUS Trial 
Group: Empirical micafungin treatment and survival without 
invasive fungal infection in adults with ICU-acquired 
sepsis, Candida colonization, and multiple organ failure: 
The EMPIRICUS randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 
316:1555–1564
 248. Cornely OA, Sprute R, Bassetti M, et al: Global guideline for 
the diagnosis and management of candidiasis: An initiative 
of the ECMM in cooperation with ISHAM and ASM. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2025; 25:e280–e293
 249. Cobo F, Pérez-Carrasco V, Rodríguez-Granger J, et al: 
Differences between bloodstream infections involving 
gram-positive and gram-negative anaerobes. Anaerobe 
2023; 81:102734
Prescott et al76     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 250. Murai Y, Nagaoka K, Iwanaga N, et al: Effects of extended 
anaerobic antibiotic coverage on anaerobic bloodstream in-
fection: A multisite retrospective study. Int J Infect Dis 2025; 
153:107840
 251. Buckman SA, Turnbull IR, Mazuski JE: Empiric antibiotics for 
sepsis. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2018; 19:147–154
 252. Ngo JT, Parkins MD, Gregson DB, et al: Population-based 
assessment of the incidence, risk factors, and outcomes 
of anaerobic bloodstream infections. Infection 2013; 
41:41–48
 253. Mortensen KK, Nielsen HL, Sogaard KK: Clinical and mi-
crobiological characteristics of anaerobic bacteremia dur-
ing 1994-2019: A Danish population-based cohort study. 
Anaerobe 2024; 89:102898
 254. Petersen MW, Perner A, Jonsson AB, et al: Empirical met-
ronidazole for patients with severe bacterial infection: A 
systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential 
analysis. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2019; 63:802–813
 255. Kullberg RFJ, Schinkel M, Wiersinga WJ: Empiric anti-
anaerobic antibiotics are associated with adverse clinical 
outcomes in emergency department patients. Eur Respir J 
2023; 61:2300413
 256. Chanderraj R, Admon AJ, He Y, et al: Mortality of patients with 
sepsis administered piperacillin-tazobactam vs cefepime. 
JAMA Intern Med 2024; 184:769–777
 257 . Chanderraj R, Baker JM, Kay SG, et al: In critically ill patients, 
anti-anaerobic antibiotics increase risk of adverse clinical 
outcomes. Eur Respir J 2023; 61:2200910
 258. Qian ET, Casey JD, Wright A, et al; Vanderbilt Center for 
Learning Healthcare and the Pragmatic Critical Care 
Research Group: Cefepime vs piperacillin-tazobactam in 
adults hospitalized with acute infection: The ACORN ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA 2023; 330:1557–1567
 259. Metlay JP, Waterer GW, Long AC, et al: Diagnosis and treat-
ment of adults with community-acquired pneumonia. An 
official clinical practice guideline of the American thoracic 
society and infectious diseases society of America. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 200:e45–e67
 260. Mazuski JE, Tessier JM, May AK, et al: The surgical infec-
tion society revised guidelines on the management of intra-
abdominal infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2017; 18:1–76
 261. Kullberg RFJ, Haak BW, Chanderraj R, et al: Empirical an-
tibiotic therapy for sepsis: Save the anaerobic microbiota. 
Lancet Respir Med 2025; 13:92–100
 262. Ferrara F, Castagna T, Pantolini B, et al: The challenge of 
antimicrobial resistance (AMR): Current status and future 
prospects. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 2024; 
397:9603–9615
 263. Spoto S, Daniel Markley J, Valeriani E, et al: Active sur-
veillance cultures and procalcitonin in combination with 
clinical data to guide empirical antimicrobial therapy in hos-
pitalized medical patients with sepsis. Front Microbiol 2022; 
13:797932
 264. Verdugo-Paiva F, Otaiza F, Roson-Rodríguez P, et al: Effects 
of screening strategies to detect carbapenem-resistant 
gram-negative bacteria: A systematic review. Am J Infect 
Control 2022; 50:1381–1388
 265. Tomczyk S, Zanichelli V, Grayson ML, et al: Control of 
carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae, Acinetobacter baumannii, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in healthcare 
facilities: A systematic review and reanalysis of quasi- 
experimental studies. Clin Infect Dis 2019; 68:873–884
 266. Brusselaers N, Labeau S, Vogelaers D, et al: Value of lower 
respiratory tract surveillance cultures to predict bacterial 
pathogens in ventilator-associated pneumonia: Systematic 
review and diagnostic test accuracy meta-analysis. Intensive 
Care Med 2013; 39:365–375
 267 . Antimicrobial Resistance C: Global burden of bacterial anti-
microbial resistance in 2019: A systematic analysis. Lancet 
2022; 399:629–655
 268. Bouzid D, Zanella M-C, Kerneis S, et al: Rapid diagnostic 
tests for infectious diseases in the emergency department. 
Clin Microbiol Infect 2021; 27:182–191
 269. Anton-Vazquez V, Hine P, Krishna S, et al: Rapid versus 
standard antimicrobial susceptibility testing to guide treat-
ment of bloodstream infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2021; 5:CD013235
 270. Caspar Y, Deves A, Richarme C, et al: Clinical impact and 
cost-consequence analysis of ePlex(R) blood culture identi-
fication panels for the rapid diagnosis of bloodstream infec-
tions: A single-center randomized controlled trial. Eur J Clin 
Microbiol Infect Dis 2024; 43:1193–1203
 271. Peri AM, Chatfield MD, Ling W, et al: Rapid diagnostic tests 
and antimicrobial stewardship programs for the management 
of bloodstream infection: What is their relative contribution to 
improving clinical outcomes? A systematic review and net-
work meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2024; 79:502–515
 272. Balan AM, Bodolea C, Nemes A, et al: Rapid point-of-care 
PCR testing of drug-resistant strains on endotracheal as-
pirate samples: A repurposed effective tool in the stepwise 
approach of healthcare-acquired pneumonia-A pilot study. 
Int J Mol Sci 2023; 24:13393
 273. Enne VI, Stirling S, Barber JA, et al; INHALE WP3 Study 
Group and Committees: INHALE WP3, a multicentre, 
open-label, pragmatic randomised controlled trial assess-
ing the impact of rapid, ICU-based, syndromic PCR, versus  
standard-of-care on antibiotic stewardship and clinical out-
comes in hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated pneu-
monia. Intensive Care Med 2025; 51:272–286
 274. Timbrook TT, Morton JB, McConeghy KW, et al: The effect 
of molecular rapid diagnostic testing on clinical outcomes 
in bloodstream infections: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 64:15–23
 275. Hamill RJ: Amphotericin B formulations: A comparative re-
view of efficacy and toxicity. Drugs 2013; 73:919–934
 276. Levine MT, Chandrasekar PH: Adverse effects of vori-
conazole: Over a decade of use. Clin Transplant 2016; 
30:1377–1386
 277 . Pristov KE, Ghannoum MA: Resistance of Candida to azoles 
and echinocandins worldwide. Clin Microbiol Infect 2019; 
25:792–798
 278. Perlin DS, Rautemaa-Richardson R, Alastruey-Izquierdo A: 
The global problem of antifungal resistance: Prevalence, 
mechanisms, and management. Lancet Infect Dis 2017; 
17:e383–e392
 279. Bouza E, Almirante B, García Rodríguez J, et al: Biomarkers 
of fungal infection: Expert opinion on the current situation. 
Rev Esp Quimioter 2020; 33:1–10
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     77 280. Bloos F, Held J, Kluge S, et al; SepNet Study Group: (1 --> 
3)-beta-D-Glucan-guided antifungal therapy in adults with 
sepsis: The CandiSep randomized clinical trial. Intensive Care 
Med 2022; 48:865–875
 281. Mohd Hafiz AA, Staatz CE, Kirkpatrick CMJ, et al: Continuous 
infusion vs. bolus dosing: implications for beta-lactam antibi-
otics. Minerva Anestesiol 2012; 78:94–104
 282. Goncalves-Pereira, J, Povoa P: Antibiotics in critically ill 
patients: A systematic review of the pharmacokinetics of 
beta-lactams. Crit Care 2011; 15:R206
 283. Abdul-Aziz MH, Lipman J, Akova M, et al; DALI Study 
Group: Is prolonged infusion of piperacillin/tazobactam and 
meropenem in critically ill patients associated with improved 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic and patient outcomes? 
An observation from the defining antibiotic levels in inten-
sive care unit patients (DALI) cohort. J Antimicrob Chemother 
2016; 71:196–207
 284. Dulhunty JM, Roberts JA, Davis JS, et al: Continuous in-
fusion of beta-lactam antibiotics in severe sepsis: A multi-
center double-blind, randomized controlled trial. Clin Infect 
Dis 2013; 56:236–244
 285. Abdul-Aziz MH, Hammond NE, Brett SJ, et al: Prolonged 
vs intermittent infusions of beta-lactam antibiotics in adults 
with sepsis or septic shock: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA 2024; 332:638–648
 286. Dulhunty JM, Brett SJ, De Waele JJ, et al; BLING III Study 
Investigators: Continuous vs intermittent beta-lactam antibi-
otic infusions in critically ill patients with sepsis: The BLING 
III randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2024; 332:629–637
 287 . De Waele JJ, Lipman J, Carlier M, et al: Subtleties in practical 
application of prolonged infusion of beta-lactam antibiotics. 
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2015; 45:461–463
 288. Roberts JA, Paratz J, Paratz E, et al: Continuous infusion of 
beta-lactam antibiotics in severe infections: A review of its 
role. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2007; 30:11–18
 289. Barton G, Rickard CM, Roberts JA: Continuous infusion of 
beta-lactam antibiotics in critically ill patients with sepsis: 
Implementation considerations. Intensive Care Med 2024; 
50:2150–2153
 290. Sieswerda E, Bax HI, Hoogerwerf JJ, et al: The 2021 dutch 
working party on antibiotic policy (SWAB) guidelines for em-
pirical antibacterial therapy of sepsis in adults. BMC Infect 
Dis 2022; 22:687
 291. Roberts JA, Abdul-Aziz MH, Lipman J, et al; International 
Society of Anti-Infective Pharmacology and the 
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics Study Group of 
the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious 
Diseases: Individualised antibiotic dosing for patients who 
are critically ill: Challenges and potential solutions. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2014; 14:498–509
 292. Roberts JA, Paul SK, Akova M, et al; DALI Study: DALI: de-
fining antibiotic levels in intensive care unit patients: Are 
current beta-lactam antibiotic doses sufficient for critically ill 
patients? Clin Infect Dis 2014; 58:1072–1083
 293. Veiga R, Paiva JA: Pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics 
issues relevant for the clinical use of beta-lactam antibiotics 
in critically ill patients. Crit Care 2018; 22:233
 294. Nelson NR, Morbitzer KA, Jordan JD, et al: The impact of 
capping creatinine clearance on achieving therapeutic vancomycin concentrations in neurocritically ill patients with 
traumatic brain injury. Neurocrit Care 2019; 30:126–131
 295. Gregoire N, Marchand S, Ferrandière M, et al: Population 
pharmacokinetics of daptomycin in critically ill patients with 
various degrees of renal impairment. J Antimicrob Chemother 
2019; 74:117–125
 296. Ulldemolins M, Roberts JA, Rello J, et al: The effects of hypo-
albuminaemia on optimizing antibacterial dosing in critically 
ill patients. Clin Pharmacokinet 2011; 50:99–110
 297 . Choi G, Gomersall CD, Tian Q, et al: Principles of antibacte-
rial dosing in continuous renal replacement therapy. Crit Care 
Med 2009; 37:2268–2282
 298. Roberts JA, Joynt GM, Lee A, et al; SMARRT Study 
Collaborators and the ANZICS Clinical Trials Group: The 
effect of renal replacement therapy and antibiotic dose on 
antibiotic concentrations in critically ill patients: Data from 
the multinational sampling antibiotics in renal replacement 
therapy study. Clin Infect Dis 2021; 72:1369–1378
 299. Bougle A, Dujardin O, Lepère V, et al: PHARMECMO: 
Therapeutic drug monitoring and adequacy of current dosing 
regimens of antibiotics in patients on extracorporeal life sup-
port. Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 2019; 38:493–497
 300. Cheng V, Abdul-Aziz MH, Roberts JA, et al: Overcoming bar-
riers to optimal drug dosing during ECMO in critically ill adult 
patients. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2019; 15:103–112
 301. Abdul-Aziz MH, Alffenaar JC, Bassetti M, et al; Infection 
Section of European Society of Intensive Care Medicine 
(ESICM): Antimicrobial therapeutic drug monitoring in criti-
cally ill adult patients: A Position Paper(). Intensive Care Med 
2020; 46:1127–1153
 302. Sanz-Codina M, Bozkir HO, Jorda A, et al: Individualized anti-
microbial dose optimization: A systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Clin Microbiol Infect 
2023; 29:845–857
 303. Arulkumaran N, Routledge M, Schlebusch S, et al: 
Antimicrobial-associated harm in critical care: A narrative re-
view. Intensive Care Med 2020; 46:225–235
 304. Schuts EC, Hulscher MEJL, Mouton JW, et al: Current ev-
idence on hospital antimicrobial stewardship objectives: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 
16:847–856
 305. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM, et al: Implementing an 
antibiotic stewardship program: Guidelines by the infectious 
diseases society of America and the society for healthcare 
epidemiology of America. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 62:e51–e77
 306. Tabah A, Bassetti M, Kollef MH, et al: Antimicrobial de- 
escalation in critically ill patients: A position statement from 
a task force of the European society of intensive care med-
icine (ESICM) and European society of clinical microbiology 
and infectious diseases (ESCMID) critically ill patients study 
group (ESGCIP). Intensive Care Med 2020; 46:245–265
 307 . Leone M, Bechis C, Baumstarck K, et al; AZUREA Network 
Investigators: De-escalation versus continuation of empirical 
antimicrobial treatment in severe sepsis: A multicenter non-
blinded randomized noninferiority trial. Intensive Care Med 
2014; 40:1399–1408
 308. Lopez-Cortes LE, Delgado-Valverde M, Moreno-Mellado E, 
et al; SIMPLIFY study group: Efficacy and safety of a struc-
tured de-escalation from antipseudomonal beta-lactams in 
Prescott et al78     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4bloodstream infections due to Enterobacterales (SIMPLIFY): 
An open-label, multicentre, randomised trial. Lancet Infect 
Dis 2024; 24:375–385
 309. Tabah A, Cotta MO, Garnacho-Montero J, et al: A systematic 
review of the definitions, determinants, and clinical outcomes 
of antimicrobial de-escalation in the intensive care unit. Clin 
Infect Dis 2016; 62:1009–1017
 310. NICE organization. Surveillance report 2018 – Antimicrobial 
stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicro-
bial medicine use (2015) NICE guideline NG15. Available 
at: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng15/resources/
surveillance-report-2018-antimicrobial-stewardship-sys-
tems-and-processes-for-effective-antimicrobial-medicine-
use-2015-nice-guideline-ng15-pdf-6119358364357 
Accessed July 18, 2025. 2018
 311. De Bus L, Depuydt P, Steen J, et al; DIANA study group: 
Antimicrobial de-escalation in the critically ill patient and 
assessment of clinical cure: The DIANA study. Intensive Care 
Med 2020; 46:1404–1417
 312. Erb T, Mihai S, Strauß R, et al: beta-(1-->3)-D-glucan- and 
mannan-guided early termination of antifungal therapy in 
ICU patients: A randomized controlled study. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother 2023; 67:e0072523
 313. De Pascale G, Posteraro B, D'Arrigo S, et al: (1,3)-beta-D-  
Glucan-based empirical antifungal interruption in suspected in-
vasive candidiasis: A randomized trial. Crit Care 2020; 24:550
 314. Rouze A, Loridant S, Poissy J, et al; S-TAFE study group: 
Biomarker-based strategy for early discontinuation of empir-
ical antifungal treatment in critically ill patients: A randomized 
controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2017; 43:1668–1677
 315. Dark P, Hossain A, McAuley DF, et al; ADAPT-Sepsis 
Collaborators: Biomarker-guided antibiotic duration for hos-
pitalized patients with suspected sepsis: The ADAPT-sepsis 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2025; 333:682–693
 316. Stoutenbeek CP, van Saene HK, Miranda DR, et al: The 
effect of selective decontamination of the digestive tract on 
colonisation and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. 
Intensive Care Med 1984; 10:185–192
 317 . Oostdijk EA, de Smet AMGA, Blok HEM, et al: Ecological 
effects of selective decontamination on resistant gram- 
negative bacterial colonization. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2010; 181:452–457
 318. Buitinck S, Jansen R, Rijkenberg S, et al: The ecological 
effects of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
(SDD) on antimicrobial resistance: A 21-year longitudinal 
single-centre study. Crit Care 2019; 23:208
 319. Hammond NE, Myburgh J, Seppelt I, et al: Association be-
tween selective decontamination of the digestive tract and 
in-hospital mortality in intensive care unit patients receiving 
mechanical ventilation: A systematic review and meta- 
analysis. JAMA 2022; 328:1922–1934
 320. SuDdicu Investigators for the Australian New Zealand 
Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials, G.; et al: Effect of selec-
tive decontamination of the digestive tract on hospital mor-
tality in critically ill patients receiving mechanical ventilation: 
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022; 328:1911–1921
 321. Cuthbertson BH, Billot L, Campbell MK, et al: Selective de-
contamination of the digestive tract during ventilation in the 
ICU. N Engl J Med 2025 Oct 29. [online first]  322. Gershengorn HB, Garland A, Kramer A, et al: Variation of 
arterial and central venous catheter use in United States in-
tensive care units. Anesthesiology 2014; 120:650–664
 323. Mahendra M, McQuillen P, Dudley RA, et al: Variation in ar-
terial and central venous catheter use in pediatric intensive 
care units. J Intensive Care Med 2021; 36:1250–1257
 324. Wong T, et al.: Pragmatic randomized trial for arterial cath-
eters in the critical care environment (GRACE) [abstract]. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 2024; 209:A4783
 325. Gershengorn HB, Wunsch H, Scales DC, et al: Association 
between arterial catheter use and hospital mortality in inten-
sive care units. JAMA Intern Med 2014; 174:1746–1754
 326. Barros A, Nguyen H, Lee H, et al: Effect of arterial cath-
eter on vasopressor use in patients with shock: A propensity 
score matching analysis on a multi-center prospective co-
hort. Chest 2020; 158:A642
 327 . Rasla S, Mohamed A, Qureshi R, et al: Association between 
the use of arterial catheters and hospital outcomes in criti-
cally ill patients. Chest 2017; 152:A336
 328. Ou Q, Cai G, Zhou Y, et al: Arterial catheterization and  
in-hospital mortality in sepsis: A propensity score-matched 
study. BMC Anesthesiol 2022; 22:178
 329. Ribezzo S, Spina E, Di Bartolomeo S, et al: Noninvasive tech-
niques for blood pressure measurement are not a reliable 
alternative to direct measurement: A randomized crossover 
trial in ICU. ScientificWorldJournal 2014; 2014:353628
 330. Bur A, Hirschl MM, Herkner H, et al: Accuracy of oscillomet-
ric blood pressure measurement according to the relation 
between cuff size and upper-arm circumference in critically 
ill patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:371–376
 331. Lakhal K, Macq C, Ehrmann S, et al: Noninvasive monitor-
ing of blood pressure in the critically ill: Reliability according 
to the cuff site (arm, thigh, or ankle). Crit Care Med 2012; 
40:1207–1213
 332. Riley LE, Chen GJ, Latham HE: Comparison of noninvasive 
blood pressure monitoring with invasive arterial pressure 
monitoring in medical ICU patients with septic shock. Blood 
Press Monit 2017; 22:202–207
 333. Haber EN, Sonti R, Simkovich SM, et al: Accuracy of non-
invasive blood pressure monitoring in critically ill adults. J 
Intensive Care Med 2024; 39:665–671
 334. Lakhal K, Dauvergne JE, Kamel T, et al: Noninvasive monitor-
ing of arterial pressure: finger or lower leg as alternatives to 
the upper arm: A prospective study in three ICUs. Crit Care 
Med 2023; 51:1350–1362
 335. Kaufmann T, Cox EGM, Wiersema R, et al; SICS Study 
Group: Non-invasive oscillometric versus invasive arterial 
blood pressure measurements in critically ill patients: A post 
hoc analysis of a prospective observational study. J Crit Care 
2020; 57:118–123
 336. Meidert AS, Dolch ME, Mühlbauer K, et al: Oscillometric 
versus invasive blood pressure measurement in patients with 
shock: A prospective observational study in the emergency 
department. J Clin Monit Comput 2021; 35:387–393
 337 . Engelbrecht-Wiggans E, Palmer J, Hollis G, et al: Most 
patients with non-hypertensive diseases at a critical care 
resuscitation unit require arterial pressure monitoring: A 
prospective observational study. World J Emerg Med 2023; 
14:173–178
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     79 338. Macedo SK, Bissoli T, Dias LC, et al: Comparative study to 
evaluate blood pressure levels measured by an invasive 
method versus a non-invasive method in patients in an inten-
sive care unit. Critical Care 2010; 14:P139
 339. Tijsma L, et al: Non-invasive blood pressure measurements 
versus invasive blood pressure measurements in critically 
ill patients with shock. Intensive Care Medicine Experimental 
2019; 7:92
 340. Tran QK, Gelmann D, Alam Z, et al: Discrepancy between 
invasive and noninvasive blood pressure measurements in 
patients with sepsis by vasopressor status. West J Emerg 
Med 2022; 23:358–367
 341. Muller G, Contou D, Ehrmann S, et al: Deferring arterial cath-
eterization in critically ill patients with shock. N Engl J Med 
2025; 393:1875–1888
 342. Hammond NE, Taylor C, Finfer S, et al; Fluid-TRIPS and 
Fluidos Investigators: Patterns of intravenous fluid resus-
citation use in adult intensive care patients between 2007 
and 2014: An international cross-sectional study. PLoS One 
2017; 12:e0176292
 343. Hammond NE, Zampieri FG, Di Tanna GL, et al: Balanced 
crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults - A sys-
tematic review with meta-analysis. NEJM Evid 2022; 
1:EVIDoa2100010
 344. Zampieri FG, Cavalcanti AB, Di Tanna GL, et al: Balanced 
crystalloids versus saline for critically ill patients (BEST-
Living): A systematic review and individual patient data meta-
analysis. Lancet Respir Med 2024; 12:237–246
 345. Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al; SMART Investigators 
and the Pragmatic Critical Care Research Group: Balanced 
crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults. N Engl J Med 
2018; 378:829–839
 346. Zampieri FG, Machado FR, Biondi RS, et al; BaSICS inves-
tigators and the BRICNet members: Effect of intravenous 
fluid treatment with a balanced Solution vs 0.9% saline solu-
tion on mortality in critically ill patients: The BaSICS random-
ized clinical trial. JAMA 2021; 326:1–12
 347 . Finfer S, Micallef S, Hammond N, et al; PLUS Study 
Investigators and the Australian New Zealand Intensive Care 
Society Clinical Trials Group: Balanced multielectrolyte solu-
tion versus saline in critically ill adults. N Engl J Med 2022; 
386:815–826
 348. Jackson KE, Wang Li, Casey JD, et al; SMART Investigators 
and the Pragmatic Critical Care Research Group: Effect of 
early balanced crystalloids before ICU admission on sepsis 
outcomes. Chest 2021; 159:585–595
 349. Gelbenegger G, Shapiro NI, Zeitlinger M, et al: Lactated ring-
er’s or normal saline for initial fluid resuscitation in sepsis-
induced hypotension. Crit Care Med 2025; 53:e1140–e1144
 350. Zampieri FG, Machado FR, Biondi RS, et al: Association 
between type of fluid received prior to enrollment, type of 
admission, and effect of balanced crystalloid in critically ill 
adults: A secondary exploratory analysis of the BaSICS clin-
ical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2022; 205:1419–1428
 351. Caironi P, Tognoni G, Masson S, et al; ALBIOS Study 
Investigators: Albumin replacement in patients with severe 
sepsis or septic shock. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:1412–1421
 352. Bai Z, Lai Y, Han K, et al: Human albumin for adults with 
sepsis: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Medicine (Baltim) 2024; 
103:e40983
 353. Geng L, Tian X, Gao Z, et al: Different concentrations of al-
bumin versus crystalloid in patients with sepsis and septic 
shock: A meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J 
Intensive Care Med 2023; 38:679–689
 354. Bannard-Smith J, Elrakhawy M, Norman G, et al: The efficacy, 
safety and effectiveness of hyperoncotic albumin solutions in 
patients with sepsis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
J Intensive Care Soc 2024; 25:308–318
 355. Wang Y, Chen K, Li X, et al: Clinical efficacy of various re-
suscitation fluids in the management of sepsis in postoper-
ative surgical and trauma patients: A systematic review and 
meta--analysis. Wideochir Inne Tech Maloinwazyjne 2024; 
19:275–288
 356. Wiedermann CJ: Human albumin infusion in critically 
ill and perioperative patients: Narrative rapid review of 
meta-analyses from the last five years. J Clin Med 2023; 
12:5919
 357 . Callum J, Skubas NJ, Bathla A, et al; International Collaboration 
for Transfusion Medicine Guidelines Intravenous Albumin 
Guideline Group: Use of intravenous albumin: A guideline 
from the international collaboration for transfusion medicine 
guidelines. Chest 2024; 166:321–338
 358. Maiwall R, Kumar A, Pasupuleti SSR, et al: A randomized-
controlled trial comparing 20% albumin to plasmalyte in 
patients with cirrhosis and sepsis-induced hypotension 
[ALPS trial]. J Hepatol 2022; 77:670–682
 359. Gray AJ, Oatey K, Grahamslaw J, et al; Albumin, Balanced, 
and Crystalloid-Sepsis (ABC-Sepsis) Investigators: 
Albumin versus balanced crystalloid for the early resus-
citation of sepsis: An open parallel-group randomized 
feasibility trial- the ABC-sepsis trial. Crit Care Med 2024; 
52:1520–1532
 360. Park CHL, de Almeida JP, de Oliveira GQ, et al: Lactated 
ringer’s versus 4% albumin on lactated ringer’s in early 
sepsis therapy in cancer patients: A pilot single-center ran-
domized trial. Crit Care Med 2019; 47:e798–e805
 361. Annane D, Siami S, Jaber S, et al; CRISTAL Investigators: 
Effects of fluid resuscitation with colloids vs crystalloids 
on mortality in critically ill patients presenting with hypovo-
lemic shock: The CRISTAL randomized trial. JAMA 2013; 
310:1809–1817
 362. Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al; SAFE Study Investigators: 
A comparison of albumin and saline for fluid resuscitation in 
the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:2247–2256
 363. Diz JC, Luna-Rojas P, Díaz-Vidal P, et al: Effect of treatment 
with balanced crystalloids versus normal saline on the mor-
tality of critically ill patients with and without traumatic brain 
injury: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesth Analg 
2025; 141:152–161
 364. Investigators SS, et al: Saline or albumin for fluid resusci-
tation in patients with traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med 
2007; 357:874–884
 365. Philips CA, Maiwall R, Sharma MK, et al: Comparison of 5% 
human albumin and normal saline for fluid resuscitation in 
sepsis induced hypotension among patients with cirrhosis 
(FRISC study): A randomized controlled trial. Hepatol Int 
2021; 15:983–994
Prescott et al80     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 366. Martin GS, Bassett P: Crystalloids vs. colloids for fluid resus-
citation in the Intensive Care Unit: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Crit Care 2019; 50:144–154
 367 . Arabi YM, Belley-Cote E, Carsetti A, et al; European Society 
of Intensive Care Medicine: European society of intensive 
care medicine clinical practice guideline on fluid therapy in 
adult critically ill patients. Part 1: The choice of resuscitation 
fluids. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50:813–831
 368. Chen C, Kollef MH: Targeted fluid minimization following in-
itial resuscitation in septic shock: A pilot study. Chest 2015; 
148:1462–1469
 369. Corl KA, Prodromou M, Merchant RC, et al: The restrictive 
IV fluid trial in severe sepsis and septic shock (RIFTS): A 
randomized pilot study. Crit Care Med 2019; 47:951–959
 370. Hjortrup PB, Haase N, Bundgaard H, et al; CLASSIC Trial 
Group: Restricting volumes of resuscitation fluid in adults 
with septic shock after initial management: The CLASSIC 
randomised, parallel-group, multicentre feasibility trial. 
Intensive Care Med 2016; 42:1695–1705
 371. Macdonald SPJ, Keijzers G, Taylor DM, et al; REFRESH 
trial investigators: Restricted fluid resuscitation in sus-
pected sepsis associated hypotension (REFRESH): A 
pilot randomised controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2018; 
44:2070–2078
 372. Semler MW, Janz DR, Casey JD, et al: Conservative fluid 
management after sepsis resuscitation: A pilot randomized 
trial. J Intensive Care Med 2020; 35:1374–1382
 373. Jessen MK, Andersen LW, Thomsen MH, et al: Restrictive 
fluids versus standard care in adults with sepsis in the emer-
gency department (REFACED): A multicenter, randomized 
feasibility trial. Acad Emerg Med 2022; 29:1172–1184
 374. Meyhoff TS, Hjortrup PB, Wetterslev J, et al; CLASSIC Trial 
Group: Restriction of intravenous fluid in ICU patients with 
septic shock. N Engl J Med 2022; 386:2459–2470
 375. Bednarczyk JM, Fridfinnson JA, Kumar A, et al: Incorporating 
dynamic assessment of fluid responsiveness into goal-
directed therapy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit 
Care Med 2017; 45:1538–1545
 376. Ehrman RR, Gallien JZ, Smith RK, et al: Resuscitation 
guided by volume responsiveness does not reduce mor-
tality in sepsis: A meta-analysis. Crit Care Explor 2019; 
1:e0015
 377 . Azadian M, Win S, Abdipour A, et al: Mortality benefit from the 
passive leg raise maneuver in guiding resuscitation of septic 
shock patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomized trials. J Intensive Care Med 2022; 37:611–617
 378. Douglas IS, Alapat PM, Corl KA, et al: Fluid response evalu-
ation in sepsis hypotension and shock: A randomized clinical 
trial. Chest 2020; 158:1431–1445
 379. Basmaji J, Arntfield R, Desai K, et al: The impact of point-of-
care ultrasound-guided resuscitation on clinical outcomes in 
patients with shock: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Crit Care Med 2024; 52:1661–1673
 380. Stewart GN: Researches on the circulation time and on the 
influences which affect it. J Physiol 1897; 22:159–183
 381. Fegler G: Measurement of cardiac output in anaesthetized 
animals by a thermodilution method. Q J Exp Physiol Cogn 
Med Sci 1954; 39:153–164 382. Fick A: Uber die messung des Blutquantums in den Hertzvent 
rikeln. Sitzber Physik Med Ges Wurzburg 1870; 36:290–291
 383. Velissaris D, Karamouzos V, Kotroni I, et al: The use of pul-
monary artery catheter in sepsis patients: A literature review. 
J Clin Med Res 2016; 8:769–776
 384. Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Stevenson LW, et al: Impact of the pul-
monary artery catheter in critically ill patients: meta-analysis 
of randomized clinical trials. JAMA 2005; 294:1664–1670
 385. Arya VK, Al-Moustadi W, Dutta V: Cardiac output monitor-
ing - invasive and noninvasive. Curr Opin Crit Care 2022; 
28:340–347
 386. Hadian M, Pinsky MR: Evidence-based review of the use of 
the pulmonary artery catheter: Impact data and complica-
tions. Crit Care 2006; 10(Suppl 3):S8
 387 . Scully TG, Grealy R, McLean AS, et al: Calibrated cardiac 
output monitoring versus standard care for fluid manage-
ment in the shocked ICU patient: A pilot randomised con-
trolled trial. J Intensive Care 2019; 7:1
 388. Ma S, Zhang R, Wang S, et al: Effect of global end diastolic 
volume index guidance fluid resuscitation in elderly patients 
with septic shock. Zhonghua Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue 
2017; 29:486–490
 389. Lu NF, Zheng R-Q, Lin H, et al: Improved sepsis bundles in 
the treatment of septic shock: A prospective clinical study. 
Am J Emerg Med 2015; 33:1045–1049
 390. Hou PC, Filbin MR, Napoli A, et al: Cardiac output moni-
toring managing intravenous therapy (COMMIT) to treat 
emergency department patients with sepsis. Shock 2016; 
46:132–138
 391. Kuan WS, Ibrahim I, Leong BSH, et al: Emergency depart-
ment management of sepsis patients: A randomized, goal-
oriented, noninvasive sepsis trial. Ann Emerg Med 2016; 
67:367–378.e3
 392. Diaz-Gomez JL, Sharif S, Ablordeppey E, et al: Society of 
critical care medicine guidelines on adult critical care ultra-
sonography: Focused update 2024. Crit Care Med 2025; 
53:e447–e458
 393. Levy B: Lactate and shock state: The metabolic view. Curr 
Opin Crit Care 2006; 12:315–321
 394. Ding XF, Yang Z-Y, Xu Z-T, et al: Early goal-directed and  
lactate-guided therapy in adult patients with severe sepsis 
and septic shock: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. J Transl Med 2018; 16:331
 395. Pan J, Peng M, Liao C, et al: Relative efficacy and safety 
of early lactate clearance-guided therapy resuscitation in 
patients with sepsis: A meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltim) 
2019; 98:e14453
 396. Yumoto T, Kuribara T, Yamada K, et al: Clinical parameter-
guided initial resuscitation in adult patients with septic shock: 
A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Acute Med 
Surg 2023; 10:e914
 397 . Gu WJ, Zhang Z, Bakker J: Early lactate clearance-guided 
therapy in patients with sepsis: A meta-analysis with trial 
sequential analysis of randomized controlled trials. Intensive 
Care Med 2015; 41:1862–1863
 398. Simpson SQ, Gaines M, Hussein Y, et al: Early goal-directed 
therapy for severe sepsis and septic shock: A living system-
atic review. J Crit Care 2016; 36:43–48
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     81 399. Baelani I, Jochberger S, Laimer T, et al: Identifying resource 
needs for sepsis care and guideline implementation in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo: A cluster survey of 66 
hospitals in four eastern provinces. Middle East J Anaesthesiol 
2012; 21:559–575
 400. Hernandez G, Ospina-Tascón GA, Damiani LP, et al; The 
ANDROMEDA SHOCK Investigators and the Latin America 
Intensive Care Network (LIVEN): Effect of a resuscitation 
strategy targeting peripheral perfusion status vs serum lac-
tate levels on 28-day mortality among patients with septic 
shock: The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA 2019; 321:654–664
 401. Shrestha GS, Kwizera A, Lundeg G, et al: International 
Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines 2016: The perspec-
tive from low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2017; 17:893–895
 402. Morin A, Missri L, Urbina T, et al: Relationship between skin 
microvascular blood flow and capillary refill time in critically 
ill patients. Crit Care 2025; 29:57
 403. Hernandez, G, Carmona P, Ait-Oufella H: Monitoring cap-
illary refill time in septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2024; 
50:580–582
 404. Hansen M, Gillespie J, Riddick T, et al: Evaluation of elec-
tronic measurement of capillary refill for Sepsis screening at 
ED triage. Am J Emerg Med 2023; 70:61–65
 405. Jouffroy R, Saade A, Tourtier JP, et al: Skin mottling score and 
capillary refill time to assess mortality of septic shock since 
pre-hospital setting. Am J Emerg Med 2019; 37:664–671
 406. Wang M, Tong M, Tian Z: Prolonged capillary refill time and 
short-term mortality of critically ill patients: A meta-analysis. 
Am J Emerg Med 2024; 79:127–135
 407 . Putowski Z, Gołdyn M, Pluta MP, et al: Correlation between 
mean arterial pressure and capillary refill time in patients 
with septic shock: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Intensive Care Med 2023; 38:838–846
 408. Wesolek F, Putowski Z, Staniszewska W, et al: Capillary Refill 
Time as a Part of Routine Physical Examination in Critically 
Ill Patients Undergoing Vasoactive Therapy: A Prospective 
Study. J Clin Med 2024; 13:5782
 409. Raia L, Gabarre P, Bonny V, et al: Kinetics of capillary refill 
time after fluid challenge. Ann Intensive Care 2022; 12:74
 410. Castro R, Kattan E, Ferri G, et al: Effects of capillary refill 
time-vs. lactate-targeted fluid resuscitation on regional, mi-
crocirculatory and hypoxia-related perfusion parameters in 
septic shock: A randomized controlled trial. Ann Intensive 
Care 2020; 10:150
 411. Kattan E, Bakker J, Estenssoro E, et al: Hemodynamic  
phenotype-based, capillary refill time-targeted resuscitation 
in early septic shock: The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK-2 ran-
domized clinical trial study protocol. Rev Bras Ter Intensiva 
2022; 34:96–106
 412. et al.; Andromeda-Shock-2 Investigators for the Andromeda 
Research Network, S.S.o.A.R.: Personalized hemodynamic 
resuscitation targeting capillary refill time in early septic 
shock: The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK-2 randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA 2025; 334:1988–1999
 413. Russell JA: Bench-to-bedside review: Vasopressin in the 
management of septic shock. Crit Care 2011; 15:226 414. Gordon AC, Mason AJ, Thirunavukkarasu N, et al; VANISH 
Investigators: Effect of early vasopressin vs norepinephrine 
on kidney failure in patients with septic shock: The VANISH 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 316:509–518
 415. Hajjar LA, Zambolim C, Belletti A, et al: Vasopressin versus 
norepinephrine for the management of septic shock in 
cancer patients: The VANCS II randomized clinical trial. Crit 
Care Med 2019; 47:1743–1750
 416. Khanna A, English SW, Wang XS, et al; ATHOS-3 
Investigators: Angiotensin II for the treatment of vasodilatory 
shock. N Engl J Med 2017; 377:419–430
 417 . Chawla LS, Busse L, Brasha-Mitchell E, et al: Intravenous an-
giotensin II for the treatment of high-output shock (ATHOS 
trial): a pilot study. Crit Care 2014; 18:534
 418. Drugs.com. Comparing Levophed vs Vasopressin. Available 
at: https://www.drugs.com/compare/levophed-vs-vasopres-
sin Accessted July 22, 2025
 419. Russell JA, Walley KR, Singer J, et al; VASST Investigators: 
Vasopressin versus norepinephrine infusion in patients with 
septic shock. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:877–887
 420. Barzegar E, Ahmadi A, Mousavi S, et al: The therapeutic role 
of vasopressin on improving lactate clearance during and 
after vasogenic shock: Microcirculation, is it the black box? 
Acta Med Iran 2016; 54:15–23
 421. Dunser MW, Mayr AJ, Ulmer H, et al: Arginine vasopressin 
in advanced vasodilatory shock: A prospective, randomized, 
controlled study. Circulation 2003; 107:2313–2319
 422. Hammond DA, Ficek OA, Painter JT, et al: Prospective open-
label trial of early concomitant vasopressin and norepineph-
rine therapy versus initial norepinephrine monotherapy in 
septic shock. Pharmacotherapy 2018; 38:531–538
 423. Lauzier F, Lévy B, Lamarre P, et al: Vasopressin or norepi-
nephrine in early hyperdynamic septic shock: A randomized 
clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2006; 32:1782–1789
 424. Malay MB, Ashton RC, Landry DW, et al: Low-dose vaso-
pressin in the treatment of vasodilatory septic shock. J 
Trauma 1999; 47:699–703; discussion 703
 425. Oliveira S, Dessa F, Rocha C, et al: Early vasopressin applica-
tion in shock study. Crit Care 2014; 18(Suppl 1):P158
 426. Fonseca-Ruiz NJ, Cano AL, Carmona DPO, et al: Uso de 
vasopresina en pacientes con choque séptico refractario a 
catecolaminas. Estudio piloto. Acta Colombiana de Cuidado 
Intensivo 2013; 13:114–123
 427 . Nagendran M, Russell JA, Walley KR, et al: Vasopressin 
in septic shock: an individual patient data meta-analysis 
of randomised controlled trials. Intensive Care Med 2019; 
45:844–855
 428. Kalimouttou A, Kennedy JN, Feng J, et al: Optimal vaso-
pressin initiation in septic shock: The OVISS reinforcement 
learning study. JAMA 2025; 333:1688–1698
 429. Chen C, Pang L, Wang Y, et al: Combination era, using com-
bined vasopressors showed benefits in treating septic shock 
patients: A network meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Ann Transl Med 2019; 7:535
 430. Shi R, Hamzaoui O, De Vita N, et al: Vasopressors in septic 
shock: Which, when, and how much? Ann Transl Med 2020; 
8:794
Prescott et al82     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 431. Myburgh JA, Higgins A, Jovanovska A, et al; CAT Study 
investigators: A comparison of epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine in critically ill patients. Intensive Care Med 2008; 
34:2226–2234
 432. Belletti A, Benedetto U, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al: The effect of 
vasoactive drugs on mortality in patients with severe sepsis 
and septic shock. A network meta-analysis of randomized 
trials. J Crit Care 2017; 37:91–98
 433. Jia L, Wang P, Li C, et al: The efficacy and safety of vaso-
pressors for septic shock patients: A systemic review and 
network meta-analysis. Shock 2023; 60:746–752
 434. Fernando SM, Tran A, Soliman K, et al: Methylene blue in 
septic shock: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit 
Care Explor 2024; 6:e1110
 435. Luis-Silva F, Menegueti MG, Peres LM, et al: Methylene blue 
therapy in addition to standard treatment for acute-phase 
septic shock: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Front Med 
(Lausanne) 2024; 11:1431321
 436. Yune H, Kim K, Jo YH, et al: 1453: Infusion of methylene 
blue in severe sepsis and septic shock: A randomized con-
trolled trial. Crit Care Med 2016; 44:439–439
 437 . Lopez A, Lorente JA, Steingrub J, et al: Multiple-center, 
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study of 
the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor 546C88: Effect on sur-
vival in patients with septic shock. Crit Care Med 2004; 
32:21–30
 438. Ibarra-Estrada M, Kattan E, Aguilera-González P, et al: Early 
adjunctive methylene blue in patients with septic shock: A 
randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2023; 27:110
 439. Hasegawa D, Ishisaka Y, Maeda T, et al: Prevalence and 
prognosis of sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. J Intensive Care Med 2023; 
38:797–808
 440. Shvilkina T, Shapiro N: Sepsis-Induced myocardial dysfunc-
tion: Heterogeneity of functional effects and clinical signifi-
cance. Front Cardiovasc Med 2023; 10:1200441
 441. Dubin A, Mugno M: The effects of dobutamine in septic 
shock: An updated narrative review of clinical and experi-
mental studies. Medicina (Kaunas) 2024; 60:751
 442. Tongyoo S, Chobngam S, Yolsiriwat N, et al: Effects of ad-
junctive milrinone versus placebo on hemodynamics in 
patients with septic shock: A randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Med 2025; 57:2484464
 443. Scheeren TWL, Bakker J, Kaufmann T, et al: Current use 
of inotropes in circulatory shock. Ann Intensive Care 2021; 
11:21
 444. Thongprayoon C, Cheungpasitporn W, Harrison AM, et al: 
Temporal trends in the utilization of vasopressors in intensive 
care units: An epidemiologic study. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol 
2016; 17:19
 445. Russell JA: Vasopressor therapy in critically ill patients with 
shock. Intensive Care Med 2019; 45:1503–1517
 446. Izcovich A, González Malla C, Manzotti M, et al: Midodrine for 
orthostatic hypotension and recurrent reflex syncope: A sys-
tematic review. Neurology 2014; 83:1170–1177
 447 . House AA, McIntyre CW: Midodrine is an effective therapy 
for resistant intradialytic hypotension: PRO. Kidney360 
2023; 4:299–301 448. Kilcommons SJ, Hammal F, Kamaleldin M, et al: Adjunctive 
midodrine therapy for vasopressor-dependent shock in the 
ICU: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 
2025; 53:e384–e399
 449. Suzuki T, Morisaki H, Serita R, et al: Infusion of the beta- 
adrenergic blocker esmolol attenuates myocardial dysfunc-
tion in septic rats. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:2294–2301
 450. Rehberg S, Frank S, Č erný V, et al; LANDI-SEP Study 
Group: Landiolol for heart rate control in patients with 
septic shock and persistent tachycardia. A multicenter 
randomized clinical trial (Landi-SEP). Intensive Care Med  
2024; 50:1622–1634
 451. Whitehouse T, Hossain A, Perkins GD, et al; STRESS-L 
Collaborators: Landiolol and organ failure in patients with 
septic shock: The STRESS-L randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
2023; 330:1641–1652
 452. Morelli A, Ertmer C, Westphal M, et al: Effect of heart rate 
control with esmolol on hemodynamic and clinical outcomes 
in patients with septic shock: A randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA 2013; 310:1683–1691
 453. McChesney C, Orozco N, Fiorini K, et al: Impact of short-acting 
beta-blockers on the outcomes of patients with septic shock: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2025; 
53:e1125–e1139
 454. Chaudhuri D, Lazarte J, Shah K, et al. Approaches to  
converting Spo2/FIO2 ratio to PaO2/FIO2 ratio for assess-
ment of respiratory failure in critically ill patients: A system-
atic review. Crit Care Med 2026 Jan 6. [online first] 
 455. Rice TW, Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, et al; National Institutes 
of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ARDS 
Network: Comparison of the SpO2/FIO2 ratio and the 
PaO2/FIO2 ratio in patients with acute lung injury or ARDS. 
Chest 2007; 132:410–417
 456. Sjoding MW, Dickson RP, Iwashyna T J, et al: Racial bias 
in pulse oximetry measurement. N Engl J Med 2020; 
383:2477–2478
 457 . Martin D, Johns C, Sorrell L, et al: Effect of skin tone on 
the accuracy of the estimation of arterial oxygen saturation 
by pulse oximetry: A systematic review. Br J Anaesth 2024; 
132:945–956
 458. Matthay MA, Arabi Y, Arroliga AC, et al: A new global defini-
tion of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2024; 209:37–47
 459. Alipanah-Lechner N, Cavalcanti AB, Diaz J, et al: From berlin 
to global: The need for syndromic definitions of acute respi-
ratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2024; 
209:21–23
 460. Barrot L, Asfar P, Mauny F, et al; LOCO2 Investigators and 
REVA Research Network: Liberal or conservative oxygen 
therapy for acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J 
Med 2020; 382:999–1008
 461. Gelissen H, de Grooth H-J, Smulders Y, et al: Effect of low-
normal vs high-normal oxygenation targets on organ dys-
function in critically ill patients: A randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA 2021; 326:940–948
 462. Investigators I-R, et al.: Conservative oxygen therapy dur-
ing mechanical ventilation in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2020; 
382:989–998
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     83 463. Martin DS, McNeil M, Brew-Graves C, et al: A feasibility ran-
domised controlled trial of targeted oxygen therapy in me-
chanically ventilated critically ill patients. J Intensive Care Soc 
2021; 22:280–287
 464. Martin DS, et al: Conservative oxygen therapy in mechani-
cally ventilated critically ill adult patients: The UK-ROX ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA 2025; 334:398–408
 465. Nielsen FM, Klitgaard TL, Siegemund M, et al; HOT-COVID 
Trial Group: Lower vs higher oxygenation target and days 
alive without life support in COVID-19: The HOT-COVID ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA 2024; 331:1185–1194
 466. Panwar R, Hardie M, Bellomo R, et al; CLOSE Study 
Investigators: Conservative versus liberal oxygenation tar-
gets for mechanically ventilated patients. A pilot multicenter 
randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016; 
193:43–51
 467 . Schjorring OL, Klitgaard TL, Perner A, et al; HOT-ICU 
Investigators: Lower or higher oxygenation targets for 
acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 2021; 
384:1301–1311
 468. van der Wal LI, Grim CCA, Del Prado MR, et al; ICONIC 
investigators: Conservative versus liberal oxygenation tar-
gets in intensive care unit patients (ICONIC): A randomized 
clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2023; 208:770–779
 469. Semler MW, Casey JD, Lloyd BD, et al; PILOT Investigators 
and the Pragmatic Critical Care Research Group: Oxygen-
saturation targets for critically ill adults receiving mechanical 
ventilation. N Engl J Med 2022; 387:1759–1769
 470. Nafae RM, Shouman W, Abdelmoneam SH, et al: Conservative 
versus conventional oxygen therapy in type I acute respira-
tory failure patients in respiratory intensive care unit, Zagazig 
University. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis 2023; 94
 471. Moller MH, Granholm A, Al Duhailib Z, et al: Higher versus 
lower oxygenation targets in adult ICU patients: A rapid prac-
tice guideline. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2024; 68:302–310
 472. Klitgaard TL, Schjørring OL, Nielsen FM, et al: Higher versus 
lower fractions of inspired oxygen or targets of arterial ox-
ygenation for adults admitted to the intensive care unit. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023; 9:CD012631
 473. Buell KG, Spicer AB, Casey JD, et al: Individualized treat-
ment effects of oxygen targets in mechanically ventilated 
critically ill adults. JAMA 2024; 331:1195–1204
 474. Frat JP, Thille AW, Mercat A, et al; FLORALI Study Group: 
High-flow oxygen through nasal cannula in acute hypoxemic 
respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:2185–2196
 475. Azoulay E, Lemiale V, Mokart D, et al: Effect of high-flow 
nasal oxygen vs standard oxygen on 28-day mortality 
in immunocompromised patients with acute respiratory 
failure: The HIGH randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2018; 
320:2099–2107
 476. Andino R, Vega G, Pacheco SK, et al: High-flow nasal oxygen 
reduces endotracheal intubation: A randomized clinical trial. 
Ther Adv Respir Dis 2020; 14:1753466620956459
 477 . Ospina-Tascon GA, Calderón-Tapia LE, García AF, et al; HiFLo-
Covid Investigators: Effect of high-flow oxygen therapy vs 
conventional oxygen therapy on invasive mechanical ventila-
tion and clinical recovery in patients with severe COVID-19: A 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2021; 326:2161–2171 478. Alptekinoglu Mendil N, Temel S, Yüksel RC, et al: The use of 
high-flow nasal oxygen vs. standard oxygen therapy in hema-
tological malignancy patients with acute respiratory failure in 
hematology wards. Turk J Med Sci 2021; 51:1756–1763
 479. Frat JP, Quenot J-P, Badie J, et al; SOHO-COVID Study 
Group and the REVA Network: Effect of high-flow nasal 
cannula oxygen vs standard oxygen therapy on mor-
tality in patients with respiratory failure due to COVID-19: 
The SOHO-COVID randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022; 
328:1212–1222
 480. Perkins GD, Ji C, Connolly BA, et al; RECOVERY-RS 
Collaborators: Effect of noninvasive respiratory strategies on 
intubation or mortality among patients with acute hypoxemic 
respiratory failure and COVID-19: The RECOVERY-RS ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA 2022; 327:546–558
 481. Thota B, Samantaray A, Vengamma B, et al: A randomised 
controlled trial of high-flow nasal oxygen versus non-
rebreathing oxygen face mask therapy in acute hypoxaemic 
respiratory failure. Indian J Anaesth 2022; 66:644–650
 482. Nazir N, Saxena A: The effectiveness of high-flow nasal can-
nula and standard non-rebreathing mask for oxygen therapy 
in moderate category COVID-19 pneumonia: Randomised 
controlled trial. Afr J Thorac Crit Care Med 2022; 28
 483. Bouadma L, Mekontso-Dessap A, Burdet C, et al; 
COVIDICUS Study Group: High-dose dexamethasone and 
oxygen support strategies in intensive care unit patients 
with severe COVID-19 acute hypoxemic respiratory failure: 
The COVIDICUS randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 
2022; 182:906–916
 484. Crimi C, Noto A, Madotto F, et al; COVID-HIGH Investigators: 
High-flow nasal oxygen versus conventional oxygen therapy 
in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia and mild hypoxaemia: 
A randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2023; 78:354–361
 485. Nair PR, Haritha D, Behera S, et al: Comparison of high-flow 
nasal cannula and noninvasive ventilation in acute hypox-
emic respiratory failure due to severe COVID-19 pneumonia. 
Respir Care 2021; 66:1824–1830
 486. Grieco DL, Menga LS, Cesarano M, et al; COVID-ICU 
Gemelli Study Group: Effect of helmet noninvasive ventila-
tion vs high-flow nasal oxygen on days free of respiratory 
support in patients with COVID-19 and moderate to severe 
hypoxemic respiratory failure: The HENIVOT randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA 2021; 325:1731–1743
 487 . Al Hashim AH, Al Reesi A, Al Lawati NM, et al: Comparison 
of noninvasive mechanical ventilation with high-flow nasal 
cannula, face-mask, and helmet in hypoxemic respiratory 
failure in patients with COVID-19: A randomized controlled 
trial. Crit Care Med 2023; 51:1515–1526
 488. Nagata K, Yokoyama T, Tsugitomi R, et al; JaNP-Hi Study 
Investigators: Continuous positive airway pressure versus 
high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy for acute hypoxemic 
respiratory failure: A randomized controlled trial. Respirology 
2024; 29:36–45
 489. Investigators R, et al.: High-flow nasal oxygen vs noninva-
sive ventilation in patients with acute respiratory failure: 
The RENOVATE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2025; 
333:875–890
 490. Elagamy AE, Taha SS, Elfawy DM: High flow nasal cannula 
versus non-invasive ventilation in prevention of intubation 
Prescott et al84     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4in immunocompromised patient with acute hypoxemic res-
piratory failure. Egyptian Journal of Anaesthesia 2021; 
37:432–439
 491. Coudroy R, Frat J-P, Ehrmann S, et al; FLORALI-IM study 
group and the REVA Research Network: High-flow nasal 
oxygen alone or alternating with non-invasive ventilation in 
critically ill immunocompromised patients with acute respira-
tory failure: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 
2022; 10:641–649
 492. Botta M, Caritg O, van Meenen DMP, et al: Oxygen con-
sumption with high-flow nasal oxygen versus mechanical  
ventilation- an international multicenter observational study 
in COVID-19 patients (PROXY-COVID). Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2023; 108:1035–1041
 493. Luo J, Pavlov I, Tavernier E, et al; Awake Prone Positioning 
Meta-Analysis Group: Awake prone positioning in adults 
with COVID-19: An individual participant data meta-analysis. 
JAMA Intern Med 2025; 185:572–581
 494. Alhazzani W, Parhar KKS, Weatherald J, et al; COVI-
PRONE Trial Investigators and the Saudi Critical Care 
Trials Group: Effect of awake prone positioning on endo-
tracheal intubation in patients with COVID-19 and acute 
respiratory failure: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022; 
327:2104–2113
 495. Ehrmann S, Li J, Ibarra-Estrada M, et al; Awake Prone 
Positioning Meta-Trial Group: Awake prone positioning for 
COVID-19 acute hypoxaemic respiratory failure: A ran-
domised, controlled, multinational, open-label meta-trial. 
Lancet Respir Med 2021; 9:1387–1395
 496. Fezzi M, Antolini L, Soria A, et al: Early prone positioning 
does not improve the outcome of patients with mild pneu-
monia due to SARS-CoV-2: Results from an open-label ran-
domised controlled trial - the EPCoT study. ERJ Open Res 
2023; 9:00181–02023
 497 . Harris TRE, Bhutta ZA, Qureshi I, et al: A randomised clin-
ical trial of awake prone positioning in COVID-19 suspects 
with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. Contemp Clin Trials 
Commun 2024; 39:101295
 498. Fralick M, Colacci M, Munshi L, et al; COVID Prone Study 
Investigators: Prone positioning of patients with moderate 
hypoxaemia due to covid-19: Multicentre pragmatic ran-
domised trial (COVID-PRONE). BMJ 2022; 376:e068585
 499. Jayakumar D, Ramachandran Dnb P, Rabindrarajan Dnb E, et 
al: Standard care versus awake prone position in adult non-
intubated patients with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure 
secondary to COVID-19 infection-A multicenter feasibility 
randomized controlled trial. J Intensive Care Med 2021; 
36:918–924
 500. Johnson SA, Horton DJ, Fuller MJ, et al: Patient-directed 
prone positioning in awake patients with COVID-19 requir-
ing hospitalization (PAPR). Ann Am Thorac Soc 2021; 
18:1424–1426
 501. Kharat A, Dupuis-Lozeron E, Cantero C, et al: Self-proning 
in COVID-19 patients on low-flow oxygen therapy: A 
cluster randomised controlled trial. ERJ Open Res 2021; 
7:00692–02020
 502. Nay MA, Hindre R, Perrin C, et al: Prone position versus usual 
care in hypoxemic COVID-19 patients in medical wards: A 
randomised controlled trial. Crit Care 2023; 27:240 503. Rampon G, Jia S, Agrawal R, et al: Smartphone-guided self-
prone positioning vs usual care in nonintubated hospital 
ward patients with COVID-19: A pragmatic randomized clin-
ical trial. Chest 2022; 162:782–791
 504. Taylor SP, Bundy H, Smith WM, et al: Awake prone position-
ing strategy for nonintubated hypoxic patients with COVID-
19: A pilot trial with embedded implementation evaluation. 
Ann Am Thorac Soc 2021; 18:1360–1368
 505. Gopalakrishnan M, Khichar S, Saurabh S, et al: Effectiveness 
of early awake self proning strategy in non-intubated 
patients with COVID-19 hypoxemia: An open-labelled ran-
domized clinical trial from Jodhpur, India. Monaldi Arch Chest 
Dis 2022; 93
 506. Javed H, Qayyum F, Aslam Khan MN, et al: Effect of eight 
hours per day of intermittent self prone positioning for seven 
days on the severity of Covid-19 pneumonia/ acute respira-
tory distress syndrome. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad 2023; 
35:68–75
 507 . Phong NT, Duc DH, Hai HB, et al; OUCRU COVID RESEACH 
GROUP: Awake prone positioning effectiveness in moderate 
to severe COVID-19 a randomized controlled trial. Wellcome 
Open Res 2024; 9:543
 508. Rosen J, von Oelreich E, Fors D, et al; PROFLO Study Group: 
Awake prone positioning in patients with hypoxemic respi-
ratory failure due to COVID-19: The PROFLO multicenter 
randomized clinical trial. Crit Care 2021; 25:209
 509. Nasrallah BZN, Mahmoud MS, ElGendy HMA, et al: Patients 
self-proning with high-flow nasal cannula improves oxy-
genation in mild ARDS patients: A randomized clinical trial. 
Anesthesia, Pain, & Intensive Care 2023; 27:351–355
 510. Weatherald J, Parhar KKS, Al Duhailib Z, et al: Efficacy of 
awake prone positioning in patients with covid-19 related 
hypoxemic respiratory failure: Systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized trials. BMJ 2022; 379:e071966
 511. de Haro C, Neto AS, Gomà G, et al: Effect of a low versus in-
termediate tidal volume strategy on pulmonary complications 
in patients at risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome-
a randomized clinical trial. Front Med (Lausanne) 2023; 
10:1172434
 512. Writing Group for the PI, et al.: Effect of a low vs intermediate 
tidal volume strategy on ventilator-free days in intensive care 
unit patients without ARDS: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
2018; 320:1872–1880
 513. Lanspa MJ, Gong MN, Schoenfeld DA, et al; The National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Prevention and Early 
Treatment of Acute Lung Injury (PETAL) Clinical Trials 
Network: Prospective assessment of the feasibility of a trial 
of low-tidal volume ventilation for patients with acute respi-
ratory failure. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2019; 16:356–362
 514. Ferguson ND, Frutos-Vivar F, Esteban A, et al: Acute respi-
ratory distress syndrome: Underrecognition by clinicians and 
diagnostic accuracy of three clinical definitions. Crit Care 
Med 2005; 33:2228–2234
 515. Bellani G, Laffey JG, Pham T, et al; LUNG SAFE Investigators: 
Epidemiology, patterns of care, and mortality for patients with 
acute respiratory distress syndrome in intensive care units in 
50 countries. JAMA 2016; 315:788–800
 516. Umoh NJ, Fan E, Mendez-Tellez PA, et al: Patient and inten-
sive care unit organizational factors associated with low tidal 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     85volume ventilation in acute lung injury. Crit Care Med 2008; 
36:1463–1468
 517 . Needham DM, Colantuoni E, Mendez-Tellez PA, et al: Lung 
protective mechanical ventilation and two year survival in 
patients with acute lung injury: Prospective cohort study. 
BMJ 2012; 344:e2124
 518. Pitre T, Drover K, Chaudhuri D, et al: Corticosteroids in 
sepsis and septic shock: A systematic review, pairwise, 
and dose-response meta-analysis. Crit Care Explor 2024; 
6:e1000
 519. Qadir N, Sahetya S, Munshi L, et al: An update on man-
agement of adult patients with acute respiratory distress 
syndrome: An official american thoracic society clin-
ical practice guideline. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2024; 
209:24–36
 520. Jones BE, Ramirez JA, Oren E, et al: Diagnosis and man-
agement of community-acquired pneumonia. An official 
American thoracic society clinical practice guideline. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2026; 212:24–44
 521. Venkatesh B, Finfer S, Cohen J, et al; ADRENAL Trial 
Investigators and the Australian–New Zealand Intensive 
Care Society Clinical Trials Group: Adjunctive glucocorticoid 
therapy in patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med 2018; 
378:797–808
 522. Sakkat A, Alquraini M, Aljazeeri J, et al: Temperature control 
in critically ill patients with fever: A meta-analysis of random-
ized controlled trials. J Crit Care 2021; 61:89–95
 523. Reintam Blaser A, Alhazzani W, Belley-Cote E, et al: 
Intravenous vitamin C therapy in adult patients with sepsis: 
A rapid practice guideline. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2023; 
67:1423–1431
 524. Agarwal A, Basmaji J, Fernando SM, et al: Parenteral Vitamin 
C in patients with severe infection: A systematic review. 
NEJM Evid 2022; 1:EVIDoa2200105
 525. Anstey MH, Aljeaidi MS, Palmer R, et al: Intravenous vitamin 
C for vasoplegia: A double-blinded randomised clinical trial 
(VALENCIA trial). J Crit Care 2023; 78:154369
 526. Belousoviene E, Pranskuniene Z, Vaitkaitiene E, et al: Effect 
of high-dose intravenous ascorbic acid on microcirculation 
and endothelial glycocalyx during sepsis and septic shock: 
A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. BMC 
Anesthesiol 2023; 23:309
 527 . Feng F, Yang H, Yang W, et al: Metabolic resuscitation therapy 
in critically ill patients with sepsis and septic shock: A pilot 
prospective randomized controlled trial. Open Med (Wars) 
2023; 18:20230637
 528. Li W, Zhao R, Liu S, et al: High-dose vitamin C improves 
norepinephrine level in patients with septic shock: A single- 
center, prospective, randomized controlled trial. Medicine 
(Baltim) 2024; 103:e37838
 529. Mohamed A, Abdelaty M, Saad MO, et al: Evaluation of hy-
drocortisone, Vitamin C, and thiamine for the treatment of 
septic shock: A randomized controlled trial (the Hyvits Trial). 
Shock 2023; 59:697–701
 530. Vijayaraghavan BKT, Venkataraman R, Ramanathan Y, et al: 
A pilot feasibility randomized controlled trial of intravenous 
vitamin c in adults with sepsis in the intensive care unit: The 
lessening organ dysfunction with vitamin C-India (LOVIT-
India) trial. Indian J Crit Care Med 2023; 27:910–916 531. Lamontagne F, Masse M-H, Menard J, et al; LOVIT 
Investigators and the Canadian Critical Care Trials Group: 
Intravenous Vitamin C in adults with sepsis in the intensive 
care unit. N Engl J Med 2022; 386:2387–2398
 532. Pan B, Sun P, Pei R, et al: Efficacy of IVIG therapy for patients 
with sepsis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Transl 
Med 2023; 21:765
 533. Dellinger RP, Bagshaw SM, Antonelli M, et al; EUPHRATES 
Trial Investigators: Effect of targeted polymyxin B hemoper-
fusion on 28-day mortality in patients with septic shock and 
elevated endotoxin level: The EUPHRATES randomized clin-
ical trial. JAMA 2018; 320:1455–1463
 534. Chen JJ, Lai P-C, Lee T-H, et al: Blood purification for adult 
patients with severe infection or sepsis/septic shock: A net-
work meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Crit Care 
Med 2023; 51:1777–1789
 535. Rimmer E, Houston BL, Kumar A, et al: The efficacy and 
safety of plasma exchange in patients with sepsis and septic 
shock: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 
2014; 18:699
 536. Nakamura T, Ebihara I, Shoji H, et al: Treatment with pol-
ymyxin B-immobilized fiber reduces platelet activation in 
septic shock patients: Decrease in plasma levels of sol-
uble P-selectin, platelet factor 4 and beta-thromboglobulin. 
Inflamm Res 1999; 48:171–175
 537 . Nakamura T, Ushiyama C, Suzuki S, et al: Polymyxin  
b-immobilized fiber reduces increased plasma endothelin-1 
concentrations in hemodialysis patients with sepsis. Ren Fail 
2000; 22:225–234
 538. Tomlinson G, Al-Khafaji A, Conrad SA, et al: Bayesian meth-
ods: A potential path forward for sepsis trials. Crit Care 2023; 
27:432
 539. Klein DJ, Foster D, Walker PM, et al: Polymyxin B hemoper-
fusion in endotoxemic septic shock patients without extreme 
endotoxemia: A post hoc analysis of the EUPHRATES trial. 
Intensive Care Med 2018; 44:2205–2212
 540. National Heart L, et al.: Early high-dose Vitamin D(3) for crit-
ically ill, Vitamin D-deficient patients. N Engl J Med 2019; 
381:2529–2540
 541. Kaur M, Soni KD, Trikha A: Does vitamin D improve all-cause 
mortality in critically ill adults? An updated systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Indian J 
Crit Care Med 2022; 26:853–862
 542. Liu S, Yao C, Xie J, et al; EXIT-SEP Investigators: Effect of 
an herbal-based injection on 28-Day mortality in patients 
with sepsis: The EXIT-SEP randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Intern Med 2023; 183:647–655
 543. Li C, Wang P, Zhang Li, et al: Efficacy and safety of Xuebijing 
injection (a Chinese patent) for sepsis: A meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. J Ethnopharmacol 2018; 
224:512–521
 544. Wang J, Zhu J, Guo J, et al: Could xuebijing injection reduce 
the mortality of severe pneumonia patients? A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Evid Based Complement Alternat 
Med 2020; 2020:9605793
 545. Song Y, Yao C, Yao Y, et al: XueBiJing injection versus pla-
cebo for critically ill patients with severe community-acquired 
pneumonia: A randomized controlled trial. Crit Care Med 
2019; 47:e735–e743
Prescott et al86     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 546. Wang Y, Parpia S, Ge L, et al: Proton-pump inhibitors to pre-
vent gastrointestinal bleeding - an updated meta-analysis. 
NEJM Evid 2024; 3:EVIDoa2400134
 547 . Cook D, Deane A, Lauzier F, et al; REVISE Investigators: 
Stress ulcer prophylaxis during Invasive mechanical ventila-
tion. N Engl J Med 2024; 391:9–20
 548. Granholm A, Zeng L, Dionne JC, et al; GUIDE Group: 
Predictors of gastrointestinal bleeding in adult ICU patients: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med 
2019; 45:1347–1359
 549. Mer M, Schultz MJ, Adhikari NK; European Society of Intensive 
Care Medicine (ESICM) Global Intensive Care Working Group 
and the Mahidol–Oxford Research Unit (MORU), Bangkok, 
Thailand: Core elements of general supportive care for patients 
with sepsis and septic shock in resource-limited settings. 
Intensive Care Med 2017; 43:1690–1694
 550. MacLaren R, Dionne JC, Granholm A, et al: Society of Critical 
Care Medicine and American Society of Health-System 
Pharmacists Guideline for the Prevention of Stress-Related 
Gastrointestinal Bleeding in Critically Ill Adults. Crit Care Med 
2024; 52:e421–e430
 551. Krag M, Marker S, Perner A, et al; SUP-ICU trial group: 
Pantoprazole in patients at risk for gastrointestinal bleeding 
in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2018; 379:2199–2208
 552. et al.; Australian, P.I.f.t.: Effect of stress ulcer prophylaxis with 
proton pump inhibitors vs histamine-2 receptor blockers on 
in-hospital mortality among ICU patients receiving invasive 
mechanical ventilation: The PEPTIC randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA 2020; 323:616–626
 553. Dickson RP: The microbiome and critical illness. Lancet 
Respir Med 2016; 4:59–72
 554. Haak BW, Prescott HC, Wiersinga WJ: Therapeutic poten-
tial of the gut microbiota in the prevention and treatment of 
sepsis. Front Immunol 2018; 9:2042
 555. Sharif S, Greer A, Skorupski C, et al: Probiotics in critical ill-
ness: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Crit Care Med 2022; 50:1175–1186
 556. Johnstone J, Meade M, Lauzier F, et al; Prevention of 
Severe Pneumonia and Endotracheal Colonization Trial 
(PROSPECT) Investigators and the Canadian Critical Care 
Trials Group: Effect of probiotics on incident ventilator- 
associated pneumonia in critically ill patients: A randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA 2021; 326:1024–1033
 557 . Acheampong A, Vincent JL: A positive fluid balance is an in-
dependent prognostic factor in patients with sepsis. Crit Care 
2015; 19:251
 558. Malbrain M, et al.: Principles of fluid management and stew-
ardship in septic shock: It is time to consider the four D’s and 
the four phases of fluid therapy. Ann Intensive Care 2018; 
8:66
 559. Finfer S, Myburgh J, Bellomo R: Intravenous fluid therapy in 
critically ill adults. Nat Rev Nephrol 2018; 14:541–557
 560. Ostermann M, Alshamsi F, Artigas Raventos A, et al: 
European society of intensive care medicine clinical practice 
guideline on fluid therapy in adult critically ill patients: Part 
3-fluid removal at de-escalation phase. Intensive Care Med 
2025; 51:1749–1763
 561. Berthelsen RE, Perner A, Jensen AK, et al: Forced fluid re-
moval in intensive care patients with acute kidney injury: The randomised FFAKI feasibility trial. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 
2018; 62:936–944
 562. Silversides JA, McMullan R, Emerson LM, et al: Feasibility 
of conservative fluid administration and deresuscitation 
compared with usual care in critical illness: The role of 
active deresuscitation after resuscitation-2 (RADAR-2) ran-
domised clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2022; 48:190–200
 563. Bagshaw SM, Gibney RTN, Kruger P, et al: The effect of 
low-dose furosemide in critically ill patients with early acute 
kidney injury: A pilot randomized blinded controlled trial (the 
SPARK study). J Crit Care 2017; 42:138–146
 564. Cinotti R, Lascarrou J-B, Azais M-A, et al: Diuretics decrease 
fluid balance in patients on invasive mechanical ventilation: 
The randomized-controlled single blind, IRIHS study. Crit 
Care 2021; 25:98
 565. Vaara ST, Ostermann M, Bitker L, et al; REVERSE-AKI study 
team: Restrictive fluid management versus usual care in 
acute kidney injury (REVERSE-AKI): A pilot randomized con-
trolled feasibility trial. Intensive Care Med 2021; 47:665–673
 566. Cantarovich F, Rangoonwala B, Lorenz H, et al; High-Dose 
Flurosemide in Acute Renal Failure Study Group: High-dose 
furosemide for established ARF: A prospective, random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial. Am J 
Kidney Dis 2004; 44:402–409
 567 . National Heart L, et al.: Comparison of two  fluid-management 
strategies in acute lung injury. N Engl J Med 2006; 
354:2564–2575
 568. Hamishehkar H, Sanaie S, Fattahi V, et al: The effect of fu-
rosemide on the level of neutrophil gelatinase-associated 
lipocalin in critically hospitalized patients with acute kidney 
injury. Indian J Crit Care Med 2017; 21:442–447
 569. Mitchell JP, Schuller D, Calandrino FS, et al: Improved out-
come based on fluid management in critically ill patients 
requiring pulmonary artery catheterization. Am Rev Respir Dis 
1992; 145:990–998
 570. Mekontso Dessap A, Roche-Campo F, Kouatchet A, et al: 
Natriuretic peptide-driven fluid management during venti-
lator weaning: A randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2012; 186:1256–1263
 571. Wichmann S, Schønemann-Lund M, Perner A, et al: Goal-
directed fluid removal with furosemide versus placebo in 
intensive care patients with fluid overload: A randomised, 
blinded trial (GODIF trial-First version). Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand 2023; 67:470–478
 572. Cagino LM, Walzl E, McSparron JI, et al: Goals of care 
assessment during hospitalization for sepsis. Ann Am Thorac 
Soc 2025; 22:1035–1041
 573. Uyeda AM, Lee RY, Pollack LR, et al: Predictors of docu-
mented goals-of-care discussion for hospitalized patients 
with chronic illness. J Pain Symptom Manage 2023; 
65:233–241
 574. Lee RY, Brumback LC, Lober WB, et al: Identifying goals 
of care conversations in the electronic health record using 
natural language processing and machine learning. J Pain 
Symptom Manage 2021; 61:136–142.e2
 575. Mahendraker N, Gutierrez-Asis E, Park S, et al: Using elec-
tronic health record mortality data to promote goals-of-care 
discussions in seriously ill transferred patients: A pilot study. 
ACI Open 2024; 08:e69–e78
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     87 576. Norton SA, Hogan LA, Holloway RG, et al: Proactive pallia-
tive care in the medical intensive care unit: Effects on length 
of stay for selected high-risk patients. Crit Care Med 2007; 
35:1530–1535
 577 . O’Mahony S, McHenry J, Blank AE, et al: Preliminary report 
of the integration of a palliative care team into an intensive 
care unit. Palliat Med 2010; 24:154–165
 578. Deptola AZ, Riggs J: Inpatient goals-of-care conversations 
reduce intensive care unit transfers in high-risk patients. Am 
J Hosp Palliat Care 2019; 36:583–586
 579. Schneiderman LJ, Gilmer T, Teetzel HD, et al: Effect of eth-
ics consultations on nonbeneficial life-sustaining treatments 
in the intensive care setting: A randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA 2003; 290:1166–1172
 580. Ma J, Chi S, Buettner B, et al: Early palliative care consulta-
tion in the medical ICU: A cluster randomized crossover trial. 
Crit Care Med 2019; 47:1707–1715
 581. Curtis JR, Lee RY, Brumback LC, et al: Intervention to pro-
mote communication about goals of care for hospitalized 
patients with serious illness: A randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA 2023; 329:2028–2037
 582. Kruser JM, Nadig NR, Viglianti EM, et al: Time-limited tri-
als for patients with critical illness: A review of the literature. 
Chest 2024; 165:881–891
 583. Kruser JM, Ashana DC, Courtright KR, et al: Defining the 
time-limited trial for patients with critical illness: An official 
American thoracic society workshop report. Ann Am Thorac 
Soc 2024; 21:187–199
 584. Turnbull AE, Hartog CS: Goal-concordant care in the ICU: 
A conceptual framework for future research. Intensive Care 
Med 2017; 43:1847–1849
 585. Kruser JM, Cox CE, Schwarze ML: Clinical momentum in the 
intensive care unit. A latent contributor to unwanted care. 
Ann Am Thorac Soc 2017; 14:426–431
 586. Chang DW, Neville TH, Parrish J, et al: Evaluation of time-
limited trials among critically ill patients with advanced med-
ical illnesses and reduction of nonbeneficial ICU treatments. 
JAMA Intern Med 2021; 181:786–794
 587 . Hauschildt KE: Whose good death? Valuation and standardi-
zation as mechanisms of inequality in hospitals. J Health Soc 
Behav 2024; 65:221–236
 588. Ashana DC, Welsh W, Preiss D, et al: Racial differences in 
shared decision-making about critical illness. JAMA Intern 
Med 2024; 184:424–432
 589. Kram BL, Schultheis JM, Kram SJ, et al: A pharmacy-
based electronic handoff tool to reduce discharge prescrib-
ing of atypical antipsychotics initiated in the intensive care 
unit: A quality improvement initiative. J Pharm Pract 2019; 
32:434–441
 590. Nulph D, et al.: Impact of a computer-assisted pharmacy tran-
sitions of care process on medication de-prescribing when 
transferring from the intensive care unit. Clinical Pharmacy 
Research Report 2023; 6:1203–1209
 591. Walsh TS, Salisbury LG, Merriweather JL, et al; RECOVER 
Investigators: Increased hospital-based physical rehabilita-
tion and information provision after intensive care unit dis-
charge: The RECOVER randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern 
Med 2015; 175:901–910 592. Gilmartin M, Moran F, Segurado R, et al: Intensive care dis-
charge facilitation using the REhabilitation after Critical 
illness Assisted discharge Pack (RECAP) model: A pilot 
randomized controlled trial. Physiother Pract Res 2018; 
39:63–74
 593. Schmidt K, Worrack S, Von Korff M, et al; SMOOTH Study 
Group: Effect of a primary care management intervention on 
mental health-related quality of life among survivors of sepsis: 
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 315:2703–2711
 594. Mikkelsen ME, Still M, Anderson BJ, et al: Society of Critical 
Care Medicine’s International Consensus Conference on 
Prediction and Identification of Long-Term Impairments After 
Critical Illness. Crit Care Med 2020; 48:1670–1679
 595. Bloom SL, Stollings JL, Kirkpatrick O, et al: Randomized clin-
ical trial of an ICU recovery pilot program for survivors of 
critical illness. Crit Care Med 2019; 47:1337–1345
 596. Cuthbertson BH, Rattray J, Campbell MK, et al; PRaCTICaL 
study group: The PRaCTICaL study of nurse led, intensive 
care follow-up programmes for improving long term out-
comes from critical illness: A pragmatic randomised con-
trolled trial. BMJ 2009; 339:b3723
 597 . Daly BJ, Douglas SL, Kelley CG, et al: Trial of a disease man-
agement program to reduce hospital readmissions of the 
chronically critically ill. Chest 2005; 128:507–517
 598. Drewitz KP, Hasenpusch C, Bernardi C, et al: Piloting an ICU 
follow-up clinic to improve health-related quality of life in 
ICU survivors after a prolonged intensive care stay (PINA): 
Feasibility of a pragmatic randomised controlled trial. BMC 
Anesthesiol 2023; 23:344
 599. Haines KJ, Hibbert E, Skinner EH, et al: In-person peer 
support for critical care survivors: The ICU REcovery solu-
tions cO-Led through surVivor Engagement (ICURESOL VE) 
pilot randomised controlled trial. Aust Crit Care 2024; 
37:859–865
 600. Ojeda A, Calvo A, Cuñat T, et al: Effectiveness of a specific 
follow up program for the management of the mental com-
ponents of post-intensive care syndrome and chronic pain 
after COVID-19: Results from the PAIN-COVID random-
ized clinical trial. Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim (Engl Ed) 2024; 
71:349–359
 601. Taylor SP, Murphy S, Rios A, et al: Effect of a multicompo-
nent sepsis transition and recovery program on mortality and 
readmissions after sepsis: The improving morbidity during 
post-acute care transitions for sepsis randomized clinical 
trial. Crit Care Med 2022; 50:469–479
 602. McPeake J, Iwashyna T J, MacTavish P, et al: Could an inte-
grated model of health and social care after critical illness 
reduce socioeconomic disparities in outcomes? A Bayesian 
analysis. BJA Open 2024; 9:100259
 603. Prinjha S, Field K, Rowan K: What patients think about 
ICU follow-up services: A qualitative study. Crit Care 2009; 
13:R46
 604. McPeake J, Oakes M, Graham C, et al; James Lind Alliance 
Sepsis PSP Steering Group: Top ten research priorities for 
sepsis research: UK james lind alliance priority setting part-
nershi. Lancet Respir Med 2024; 12:e68–e69
 605. Iwashyna T J, Ely EW, Smith DM, et al: Long-term cognitive 
impairment and functional disability among survivors of se-
vere sepsis. JAMA 2010; 304:1787–1794
Prescott et al88     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4 606. De Silva S, Urwin A, Grimwood C, et al: Health-related quality 
of life of adult sepsis survivors following critical illness: A sys-
tematic review. Crit Care Explor 2025; 7:e1238
 607 . Hodgson CL, Higgins AM, Bailey M, et al; PREDICT Study 
Investigators: Comparison of 6-month outcomes of sepsis 
versus non-sepsis critically ill patients receiving mechanical 
ventilation. Crit Care 2022; 26:174
 608. Asimakos A, Spetsioti S, Mavronasou A, et al: Additive ben-
efit of rehabilitation on physical status, symptoms and mental 
health after hospitalisation for severe COVID-19 pneumonia. 
BMJ Open Respir Res 2023; 10:e001377
 609. Battle C, James K, Temblett P, et al: Supervised exercise re-
habilitation in survivors of critical illness: A randomised con-
trolled trial. J Intensive Care Soc 2019; 20:18–26
 610. Capin JJ, Jolley SE, Morrow M, et al: Safety, feasibility and in-
itial efficacy of an app-facilitated telerehabilitation (AFTER) 
programme for COVID-19 survivors: A pilot randomised 
study. BMJ Open 2022; 12:e061285
 611. Connolly B, Thompson A, Douiri A, et al: Exercise-based re-
habilitation after hospital discharge for survivors of critical 
illness with intensive care unit-acquired weakness: A pilot 
feasibility trial. J Crit Care 2015; 30:589–598
 612. Denehy L, Skinner EH, Edbrooke L, et al: Exercise re-
habilitation for patients with critical illness: A randomized 
controlled trial with 12 months of follow-u. Crit Care 2013; 
17:R156
 613. Jackson JC, Ely EW, Morey MC, et al: Cognitive and physical 
rehabilitation of intensive care unit survivors: Results of the 
RETURN randomized controlled pilot investigation. Crit Care 
Med 2012; 40:1088–1097
 614. Longobardi I, Goessler K, de Oliveira Júnior GN, et al: Effects 
of a 16-week home-based exercise training programme on 
health-related quality of life, functional capacity, and per-
sistent symptoms in survivors of severe/critical COVID-
19: A randomised controlled trial. Br J Sports Med 2023; 
57:1295–1303
 615. McDowell K, O'Neill B, Blackwood B, et al: Effectiveness of 
an exercise programme on physical function in patients dis-
charged from hospital following critical illness: A randomised 
controlled trial (the REVIVE trial). Thorax 2017; 72:594–595
 616. McWilliams DJ, Benington S, Atkinson D: Outpatient-based 
physical rehabilitation for survivors of prolonged critical ill-
ness: A randomized controlled trial. Physiother Theory Pract 
2016; 32:179–190
 617 . Shelly AG, Prabhu NS, Jirange P, et al: Quality of life improves 
with individualized home-based exercises in critical care sur-
vivors. Indian J Crit Care Med 2017; 21:89–93
 618. Vitacca M, Barbano L, Vanoglio F, et al: Does 6-month home 
caregiver-supervised physiotherapy improve post-critical care outcomes?: A randomized controlled trial. Am J Phys 
Med Rehabil 2016; 95:571–579
 619. Sell S, Fleischmann-Struzek C, Spoden M, et al: Mental 
health in the first year after ICU-treated sepsis: Analysis of 
administrative diagnoses in German health claims data. Gen 
Hosp Psychiatry 2025; 93:109–115
 620. Cox CE, Gallis JA, Olsen MK, et al: Mobile app-based mind-
fulness intervention for addressing psychological distress 
among survivors of hospitalization for COVID-19 infection. 
CHEST Crit Care 2024; 2:100063
 621. Cox CE, Kelleher SA, Parish A, et al: Feasibility of mobile 
app-based coping skills training for cardiorespiratory failure 
survivors: The blueprint pilot randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Am Thorac Soc 2023; 20:861–871
 622. Wade DM, Mouncey PR, Richards-Belle A, et al; POPPI Trial 
Investigators: Effect of a nurse-led preventive psychological 
intervention on symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder 
among critically ill patients: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
2019; 321:665–675
 623. Vranceanu AM, Bannon S, Mace R, et al: Feasibility and effi-
cacy of a resiliency intervention for the prevention of chronic 
emotional distress among survivor-caregiver dyads admitted 
to the neuroscience intensive care unit: A randomized clin-
ical trial. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3:e2020807
 624. Vlake JH, van Bommel J, Wils E-J, et al: Intensive care unit-
specific virtual reality for critically ill patients with COVID-19: 
Multicenter randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 
2022; 24:e32368
 625. Bates A, Golding H, Rushbrook S, et al: A randomised pilot 
feasibility study of eye movement desensitisation and repro-
cessing recent traumatic episode protocol, to improve psy-
chological recovery following intensive care admission for 
COVID-19. J Intensive Care Soc 2023; 24:309–319
 626. Khan BA, Perkins AJ, Khan SH, et al: Mobile critical care 
recovery program for survivors of acute respiratory failure: 
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open 2024; 
7:e2353158
 627 . Brummel NE, Girard TD, Ely EW, et al: Feasibility and safety 
of early combined cognitive and physical therapy for critically 
ill medical and surgical patients: The activity and cognitive 
therapy in ICU (ACT-ICU) trial. Intensive Care Med 2014; 
40:370–379
 628. Dong Q, Yang Y, Tang Q, et al: Effects of early cognitive re-
habilitation training on cognitive function and quality of life in 
critically ill patients with cognitive impairment: A randomised 
controlled trial. Aust Crit Care 2023; 36:708–715
 629. Zhao J, Yao Li, Wang C, et al: The effects of cognitive in-
tervention on cognitive impairments after intensive care unit 
admission. Neuropsychol Rehabil 2017; 27:301–317