105.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
there is “insufficient evidence” to issue a 
recommendation regarding formal time-limited 
trials (TLTs) of critical care.
Remark: A TLT is a collaborative plan to use life-
sustaining therapy for a defined duration, after 
which response to therapy informs the decision as 
to whether to continue or escalate curative intent 
ICU care or to instead focus care on other goals. 
New 
A time-limited trial (TLT) is an approach to com-
munication and decision-making that complements 
other methods of prognostic communication and 
shared decision-making (582). A TLT has been de-
fined as “a collaborative plan among clinicians and 
a patient and/or their surrogate decision maker(s) 
to use life-sustaining therapy for a defined dura-
tion, after which the patient’s response to therapy 
informs the decision as to whether to continue or es-
calate curative intent ICU care or to instead focus on 
care with other goals” (583). ICU care is sometimes 
delivered discordantly with patient’s treatment pref-
erences (584), due to avoidance of prognostication, 
stemming from uncertainty about treatment respon-
siveness or clinical inertia (585). TLTs may help align 
care with treatment preferences and limit intensity of 
treatment.
We identified one before-after study that assessed the 
impact of TLTs on relevant outcomes. In this 3-center 
study performed in one city, clinicians were trained to 
perform daily assessments to identify patients at risk 
for potentially nonbeneficial treatments due to ad-
vanced illness. TLTs were the default communication 
and care-planning approach used in family meetings 
for these patients. During the intervention period, 
TLTs increased, as did high-quality family meetings. 
This change in practice was associated with a possible 
increase in “do not resuscitate” orders (RR 1.27; 95% 
CI, 1.10–1.45, low certainty), a possible reduction in 
ICU LOS (MD 2.9 d shorter, 4.89 d shorter to 0.91 d 
shorter, low certainty), and an unclear impact on hos-
pital mortality (RR 1.00; 95% CI, 0.79–1.26, very low 
certainty) (586).
Although this study suggested some desirable 
outcomes with TLTs, the non-randomized design, 
small sample size, and concerns about whether the 
intervention truly reflected formal TLTs (vs. simply 
earlier GoC discussions) led the panel to conclude 
there was insufficient evidence to issue a recom-
mendation. “In our practice, ” 64% of the panel uses 
TLTs (specifically: use life-sustaining therapy for a 
defined duration, after which the patient’s response 
to therapy informs the decision to continue care 
directed toward recovery, transition to care focused 
exclusively on comfort, or extend the trial’s dura-
tion), and among these, 64% “sometimes” and 27% 
“always” explicitly discuss the use of TLTs with the 
patient or surrogate decision maker.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     59
The panel noted that the effects of integrating 
formal TLTs likely depend on the quality of communi-
cation and shared decision-making to which they are 
added—existing care may include practices function-
ally equivalent to TLTs. The panel further noted there 
is evidence of inequity in how ICU clinicians interact 
with minoritized populations (587, 588), and that if 
done poorly, or if imposed without effective shared  
decision-making, TLTs could worsen care and ineq-
uity. Additional research is needed to determine the 
impact of TLTs, to guide individualization of TLTs, 
on training clinicians to discuss TLTs with patients 
and surrogates, and on implementing consistent TLT 
hand-offs between ICU clinicians.
Palliative Care
106.  The principles of palliative care (which 
may include palliative care consultation 
based on clinician judgement) should be 
integrated into the treatment plan, when 
appropriate, to address patient and family 
symptoms and suffering.
(good practice statement) 
Carryover 
107 .  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest against” routine formal 
palliative care consultation for all patients 
over palliative care consultation based on 
clinician judgement.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty of 
evidence)
Carryover
These statements were carried over, please see the 2021 
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
TRANSITIONS OF CARE
In-Hospital Transitions
108.  For adults with sepsis and septic shock 
admitted to ICU, we “suggest” using a 
critical care transition program, compared 
with usual care, upon transfer to the floor.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) 
Carryover 
109.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest” using a handoff process of 
critically important information at transitions 
of care over no such handoff process.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Carryover
These statements were carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Screening for Economic and Social Support
110.  Hospitals and health systems should 
screen patients with sepsis or septic shock 
for economic and social support needs 
(including housing, nutritional, financial, 
and spiritual support), and make referrals 
where available to meet these needs.
(good practice statement) 
Carryover 
This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Medication Reconciliation
111.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
comprehensive medication reconciliation 
should be performed at transitions in care, 
including at ICU and hospital discharge.
(good practice statement) 
Revisited 
112.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest” comprehensive medication 
reconciliation using a pharmacist-based 
approach at transitions in care.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Revisited
Routine transitions in care among patients with sepsis 
increase risk of polypharmacy and inappropriate med-
ications. The panel generated a good practice state-
ment on the importance of comprehensive medication 
reconciliation whenever a patient transitions from one 
setting to another.
Regarding a pharmacist-led approach to medication 
reconciliation at transitions in care, the panel consid-
ered two (589, 590) before-and-after studies that in-
cluded 658 patients comparing a pharmacist-based 
interventions to usual care. These studies used either 
pharmacy-based electronic hand off tool or a computer-
assisted pharmacy work list to reduce continued pre-
scription of atypical antipsychotics and proton pump 
inhibitors (pantoprazole) initiated in the ICU. The in-
tervention may reduce prescription of antipsychotics 
at ICU transfer (RR 0.84; 95% CI, 0.75–0.94, low cer -
tainty) and PPIs at hospital discharge (RR 0.16; 95% CI, 
0.09–0.30, low certainty) compared with usual care.
The panel judged that there were large desirable 
effects, the balance of effects favors the intervention, 
and the intervention will be acceptable and prob-
ably feasible. Such pharmacy review may already be a  
quality-of-care metric in some healthcare sys-
tems. Costs may be moderate but there are no 
Prescott et al
60     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
cost-effectiveness studies. The availability of pharmacy 
support may be limited in low resource settings.
Hospital Discharge Planning
113.  Clinical teams should provide adults with 
sepsis or septic shock and their families 
the opportunity to participate in shared 
decision making in post-ICU and hospital 
discharge planning to ensure discharge 
plans are acceptable and feasible.
(good practice statement) 
Carryover 
114.  For adult survivors of sepsis or septic 
shock and their families, clinicians should 
provide information about the hospital 
stay, sepsis and related diagnoses, treat-
ments, and common impairments after 
sepsis in the written and verbal discharge 
summary.
(good practice statement)
Carryover
115.  For adults with sepsis or septic shock 
who developed new impairments, hospital 
discharge plans should include follow-up 
with clinicians able to support and man-
age new and long-term sequelae.
(good practice statement)
Carryover
116.  Healthcare systems should implement 
strategies to ensure that patients, their 
families, and their primary care providers 
are provided with adequate information to 
navigate the transition out of hospital.
(good practice statement)
New
117 .  For adults who survive hospitalization 
with sepsis or septic shock, there is 
insufficient evidence to issue a 
recommendation regarding a specific 
structured multi-component discharge 
planning process.
Revisited
Several of these statements were carried over, please 
see the 2021 SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
Patients with sepsis and their families often experi-
ence several transitions in care before discharge home. 
Discharge planning, including comprehensive sum-
maries and medication reconciliation are potential 
strategies to assure safe transition from acute care, and 
can provide patients and families with an overview of 
sepsis-related issues.
The panel completed a meta-analysis of 3 RCTs (591–
593) that included a total of 592 patients comparing 
multi-component discharge planning protocols to usual 
care. Only one study (593) specifically studied sepsis sur-
vivors. comprehensive discharge planning may improve 
distressing patient symptom of pain (SMD –0.16; 95% 
CI, –0.36 to 0.03, low certainty), post-traumatic stress 
(SMD –0.16; 95% CI, –0.37 to 0.04, low certainty), and 
hospital readmissions (RR 0.14; 95% CI, 0.02–1.14, low 
certainty), with an uncertain impact on anxiety, with a 
point estimate favoring usual care (SMD 0.19; 95% CI, 
–0.09 to 0.47, very low certainty).
The panel considered that while the balance of 
effects, acceptability, and the equity impact probably 
favors the intervention, the certainty of evidence was 
low, there are moderate costs associated with the in-
tervention, and implementation may not always be 
feasible. The specific components of the interventions 
in each RCT were highly variable. As such, we were 
unable to generate a recommendation regarding a spe-
cific structured multi-component discharge planning 
process. However, the panel assessed that healthcare 
systems should ensure that patients, families, and their 
primary care clinicians are provided with adequate in-
formation to navigate the transition from hospital to 
community care.
Education of Patients and Families on Sepsis
118.  For adult survivors of sepsis or septic 
shock and their families, clinicians should 
provide information about the hospital stay, 
sepsis and related diagnoses, treatments, 
and common impairments after sepsis in 
the written and verbal discharge summary.
(good practice statement) 
Carryover. 
119.  For adults with sepsis and septic shock 
and their families, we “suggest” offering 
written and verbal sepsis education 
(diagnosis, treatment, post-ICU/sepsis 
syndrome) before hospital discharge and 
in the follow-up setting.
(conditional recommendation, very low 
certainty evidence)
Carryover
These statements were carried over, see the 2021 guide-
lines for rationale (65, 66).
Education of PCPs on Sepsis
120.  Health systems should implement strategies 
to ensure clinicians have the knowledge 
and competency to support sepsis survivors 
and their families during the post-hospital 
recovery.
(good practice statement) 
New 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     61
121. There is “insufficient evidence” to issue a 
recommendation regarding providing sepsis-
focused educational material to primary care 
providers as compared with usual care.
New
Sepsis survivors are discharged to PCPs to manage var-
ious comorbidities and sequelae after sepsis. PCP know-
ledge of short- and long-term consequences of sepsis 
may be important help manage ongoing symptoms and 
disabilities. One unblinded RCT (SMOOTH) included 
291 sepsis survivors from 9 ICUs examined the effect of 
a 12-month primary care management intervention on 
short-term (6-mo) and long-term (24-mo) outcomes 
(593). The multicomponent intervention included pro-
active symptom monitoring, clinical decision support 
for PCPs, and training for patients, nurses, and PCPs on  
evidence-based post-sepsis care. The trial did not show an 
improvement in mental health-related quality of life at 6 
or 12 months (593). The panel determined that we cannot 
issue a recommendation on providing educational mate-
rial to PCPs due to insufficient evidence. The panel also 
noted that implementing PCP education would require 
resources and costs, limiting use in low resource settings. 
The patient panel emphasized the importance of educat-
ing patients and families about sepsis and that patients 
and families can anticipate benefits from educating prac-
titioners with limited exposure to survivors of sepsis or 
septic shock following discharge.
Overall, there is insufficient evidence to suggest any 
specific approach to educating primary care provid-
ers. Nonetheless, it is important that health systems 
attempt to improve awareness of post-sepsis sequelae 
among clinicians caring for patients after sepsis. 
Further studies are warranted to identify types of edu-
cational programs, evaluate acceptability, assess know-
ledge retention among practitioners, and determine 
fidelity of the intervention.
Post-Discharge Care Coordination
122.  Health systems should implement 
strategies to support sepsis survivors 
and their families during the post-hospital 
recovery.
(good practice statement) 
New 
123.  There is “insufficient evidence” to make 
a recommendation on early post-hospital 
discharge follow-up vs. routine post-
hospital discharge follow-up.
Revisited
We did not identify any new studies since the 2021 
SSC guidelines evaluating the impact of timing of  
follow-up on clinical outcomes. Please see the 2021 
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66).
LONG-TERM OUTCOMES AND 
RECOVERY
Post-hospital Evaluation and Management
124.  Health systems should facilitate 
assessment and follow-up for physical, 
cognitive, and emotional problems after 
hospital discharge for sepsis or septic 
shock.
(good practice statement) 
Carryover 
125.  For adult survivors of hospitalization for 
sepsis or septic shock, we “suggest” 
offering post critical illness follow-up 
services.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Follow-up services may vary in format, 
intensity, and duration, depending on locally 
available resources and patient needs.
Revisited
Patients who survive hospitalization with sepsis or 
septic shock often suffer from new or worsening phys-
ical, cognitive, and emotional problems which they are 
often ill-equipped to navigate (7, 594).
We analyzed eight RCTs (593, 595–601) evaluat-
ing the impact of post critical illness follow-up serv-
ices consisting of variable approaches to the timing of  
follow-up care, the type of care delivered, and the out-
come measures obtained. The included RCTs provided 
peer support programs with multi-component inter -
ventions across transitions of care, follow-up clinics, 
and primary care management programs. We found 
probable small improvements in quality-of-life phys-
ical health component (SMD –0.25; 95% CI, –0.40 to 
–0.11), symptoms of anxiety (MD –1.41; 95% CI, –2.50 
to –0.32) and post-traumatic stress (SMD –0.20, 95% 
CI, –0.37 to –0.02), and a potential reduction in hos-
pital readmissions (RR 0.88; 95% CI, 0.73–1.07).
One study provided cost-effectiveness data (596), 
however, the heterogeneity of interventions precludes 
the ability to evaluate cost-effectiveness of follow-up 
services, and this should be explored in future trials. The 
panel judged that low resource settings might lack the re-
sources to deliver multi-component care. Additionally, 
rural populations might not be able to engage in the 
Prescott et al
62     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
delivery of in-person interventions, which could lead to 
inequities. Future research should include remote inter-
ventions. Nonetheless, the panel also recognized that the 
provision of post-hospital care could potentially reduce 
health inequities in certain disadvantaged communities 
(602). Although available data yielded low certainty in the 
efficacy of this intervention, patient experience of these 
programs appears positive (603), and they may provide 
benefit to patients, families, and clinicians. We suggest 
that adult survivors of hospitalization with sepsis or septic 
shock be provided with the opportunity to receive sepsis- 
and critical illness follow-up services. We acknowledge 
that the format, intensity, and duration of such services 
may vary by patient needs and locally available resources.
Despite a clear emphasis from the public panel 
members and other patient and family groups interna-
tionally on the importance of follow-up care for sepsis 
survivors (604), high-quality evidence is lacking. There 
is a need to prioritize research in this area. Future work 
should consider emerging technologies in the delivery 
of post sepsis care as well as understanding patient se-
lection and care delivery intensity.
Physical Rehabilitation
126.  For adult survivors of hospitalization for 
sepsis or septic shock who received 
invasive mechanical ventilation >48 hr, we 
“suggest” offering physical rehabilitation 
services after hospital discharge.
(conditional recommendation; low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Physical rehabilitation services may vary 
in format, intensity, and duration, depending 
on locally available resources and patient 
needs. 
Revisited 
New physical and functional disability is common fol-
lowing critical illness with sepsis or septic shock and is 
associated with reduced quality of life among survivors 
(7, 605–607).
We identified 12 RCTs evaluating physical rehabil-
itation vs. standard care after hospital discharge that 
included 782 patients who had been mechanically ven-
tilated for 48 h or longer (596, 608–618). These studies 
included a variety of physical rehabilitation interven-
tions designed to ameliorate physical health sequelae 
of critical illness or sepsis. In meta-analysis, the 
interventions were associated with possible improve-
ment in various outcomes, including physical func-
tion using the six minute walk test (SMD 0.21, 95% 
CI, –0.06 to 0.48, low certainty), quality of life physical 
health component (SMD 0.20 higher; 95% CI, –0.10 to 
0.51, low certainty), quality of life mental health com-
ponent (SMD 0.29 higher; 95% CI, –0.02 to 0.59, low 
certainty), cognitive function (SMD 0.55 higher; 95% 
CI, 0.14–0.97, low certainty), and symptoms of depres-
sion (MD –1.10 lower; 95% CI, –2.30 to 0.10). Adverse 
events were uncommon.
The panel considered that there was important vari-
ability in the included patient populations, the dosage, 
type, and duration of the interventions delivered, and 
the domain, method, and timing of outcome meas-
ures. This variability and the low certainty evidence 
precluded a strong recommendation.
Although there were no concerns about accepta-
bility of physical rehabilitation as an intervention for 
survivors of sepsis, there were concerns about the 
moderate resources and costs required to deliver the 
intervention, and the ability to equitably deliver phys-
ical rehabilitation services remains unclear. There were 
insufficient data to suggest any specific approach to 
physical rehabilitation, and the optimal approach will 
vary by patient and setting.
Given the prevalence of new or worsening physical 
problems experienced by sepsis survivors, and the im-
portance of physical recovery to sepsis survivors and 
their families, the panel suggests offering post critical 
illness physical rehabilitation for survivors of sepsis or 
septic shock, although we acknowledge that such serv-
ices may vary in format, intensity, and duration depend-
ing on patient needs and locally available resources.
Mental Health Services
127 .  For adult survivors of hospitalization for 
sepsis or septic shock, we “suggest” 
offering services that support mental health 
after hospital discharge.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Mental health support services may vary 
in format, intensity, and duration, depending on 
locally available resources and patient needs. 
Revisited 
128.  Adult survivors of hospitalization for sepsis 
or septic shock who demonstrate clinical 
symptoms of mental health disorders 
should be referred to appropriate 
healthcare professionals for evaluation and 
management.
(good practice statement)
Revisited
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     63
Patients who survive sepsis often suffer a wide range of 
mental health symptoms in the months and years fol-
lowing hospital discharge (7, 619). Although some of 
these conditions may have predated the hospitalization 
for sepsis, there is evidence to suggest that many are 
newly acquired, developing presumably due to sepsis 
itself or as a consequence of hospital and ICU treat-
ment for sepsis. Post-sepsis mental health diagnoses 
are wide-ranging, and include anxiety, depression, and 
post-traumatic stress disorder (7, 619). Importantly, 
similar findings have been reported in broader ICU 
survivor cohorts and following similar conditions, 
such as severe COVID-19, acute respiratory failure, 
and ARDS (607).
We identified nine RCTs testing variable interven-
tions designed to ameliorate mental health sequelae of 
critical illness or sepsis (593, 600, 620–626). In meta-
analysis, the interventions increased satisfaction with 
care (SMD 0.48; 95% CI, 0.19–0.78, moderate cer -
tainty) and possibly decreased depressive symptoms 
(RR 0.60; 95% CI, 0.32–1.09, low certainty). The effects 
on anxiety and PTSD symptoms were uncertain but 
point estimates suggested a possible decrease in anx-
iety symptoms (RR 0.69; 95% CI, 0.39–1.23, very low 
certainty) and increase in PTSD symptoms (RR 1.22; 
95% CI, 0.94–1.59, very low certainty).
There was considerable variability in the popula-
tions included, the manner and type of interventions 
delivered, and the domain, method, and timing of out-
comes across included studies. This variability ham-
pered our ability to issue strong recommendations. 
Nevertheless, there was broad agreement around some 
core principles, and the panel suggests that adult sur -
vivors of hospitalization for sepsis or septic shock be 
offered services that support mental health after hos-
pital discharge. Such services may vary in format, in-
tensity, and duration, depending on patient needs and 
locally available resources. Although this conditional 
recommendation applies to any survivor of sepsis or 
septic shock, the panel acknowledged that not all sur -
vivors may experience mental health symptoms. In 
low resource settings, which lack specialized personnel 
and have poor availability of mental health services, 
this recommendation is particularly challenging. The 
panel agreed that all patients who demonstrate signs of 
mental health symptoms should be referred for formal 
diagnostic evaluation and management by an appro-
priate healthcare professional.
Finally, mental health disorders can coincide with 
physical and cognitive impairment, and interactions 
can occur between these domains of impairment. 
Consequently, interventions targeting one domain 
may affect another, and the most effective interven-
tions may require multiple components, tailored to a 
particular patient’s condition.
Cognition-Targeted Therapy
129.  For adult survivors of hospitalization for sepsis 
or septic shock, there is “insufficient evidence” 
to issue a recommendation regarding cognition-
targeted therapies vs. usual care.
Remark: Where cognitive-targeted therapies are 
being used, it is reasonable to continue using them 
as they are likely acceptable and feasible. 
New 
Cognitive impairment is common among patients who 
survive sepsis and is a major determinant of caregiving 
needs and costs after sepsis (605). It has been estimated 
that irreversible cognitive damage after critical illness 
and sepsis may be associated with an additional 40 
hours per week of informal care provided by caregiv-
ers, the equivalent of a full-time job (605). Therefore, 
strategies to improve cognitive function after sepsis are 
important.
We identified four RCTs (513 total patients) eval-
uating therapies designed to cognitive function 
after critical illness or sepsis (613, 627–629). These  
cognition-focused interventions possibly reduced 
prevalence of cognitive impairment at follow-up 
(RR 0.54; 95% CI, 0.29–1.03, low certainty), possibly 
improved global cognitive function using various 
measures (SMD 1.04; 95% CI, 0.73–1.35, low cer -
tainty), and possibly improved physical function and 
mental health-related quality of life. The impact on all 
other outcomes was uncertain, but point estimated fa-
vored the intervention.
Although the point estimates for all outcomes fa-
vored the intervention, the studies were small, and 
both the interventions and outcome measures varied 
across studies. Although the balance of effects prob-
ably favored the intervention, the resources required 
were moderate and the certainty of evidence was very 
low. The panel judged that the potential personnel, 
training, and resource requirements to deliver this in-
tervention warrant higher quality evidence before this 
intervention can be recommended. Therefore, we were 
Prescott et al
64     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
unable to issue a recommendation regarding the use of 
cognition-targeted interventions to improve cognitive 
function among survivors of sepsis or septic shock.
Cognitive impairment is common, debilitating, and 
associated with lasting implications for patients’ in-
dependence and quality of life. Given the absence of 
high-quality evidence for interventions to address this 
complication of sepsis, there is a need for studies that 
identify effective and feasible cognition-targeted thera-
pies to facilitate cognitive recovery among adults who 
survive hospitalization for sepsis. Researchers should 
prioritize evaluating the efficacy and cost-effectiveness 
of cognition-targeted therapies after sepsis and septic 
shock.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the important contributions to the 
guideline from members of the patient and family sub-
group, many of whom have lived experience with sepsis 
and have dedicated themselves to improving the care for 
those with sepsis worldwide. Members include Dana 
Mirman, Jennifer Brod, Jackie Duda (Sepsis Alliance 
advisory board member), Mick O’Dowd (Sepsis 
Australia Consumer Partner and Advocacy Program), 
Orlaith Staunton (founder of END SEPSIS, and in 
memory of Rory Staunton), Idelette Numa (coordi-
nator of patient platform Sepsis en daarna/co-founder 
of Sepsis Nederland), and others. We would also like 
to acknowledge the support of the following Society of 
Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) staff members in sup-
porting the guidelines development process, including 
Vishakha Kumar, Hariyali Patel, and Dan Woznica. 
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Prescott 
and Dr. Antonelli, the Co-chairs; Dr. Derde and Dr. 
Rochwerg, the Co-vice-chairs; Dr. Alhazzani and 
Dr. Hylander Møller, the Methods Co-Leads; Dr. De 
Waele, Dr. Gershengorn, Dr. Hodgson, Dr. McIntyre, 
Dr. Mer, and Dr. Oczkowski, the Subgroup Heads; 
and Dr. Alshamsi, Dr. Belley-Cote, Dr. Dionne, Dr. 
Honarmand, Dr. Hylander Møller, and Dr. Nunnally, 
the Subgroup Methods Leads, for their invaluable con-
tributions to the development of the Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign Adult Guidelines. Special thanks also go to 
Dr. Evans and Dr. Kesecioglu, the Conflict of Interest 
Co-Chairs, for overseeing and managing potential 
conflicts of interest to ensure transparency throughout 
the process.
These guidelines have been endorsed by the fol-
lowing sponsoring societies: African Federation 
for Emergency Medicine, African Sepsis  
Alliance, American Association of Critical-Care 
Nurses, American College of Chest Physicians 
(CHEST), American Thoracic Society, Asia Pacific 
Sepsis Alliance, Asian Society of Emergency Medicine, 
Association De Medicina Intensiva Brasileira, 
Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society, 
Canadian Critical Care Society, Chinese Society of 
Critical Care Medicine, European Respiratory Society, 
European Society for Emergency Medicine, European 
Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious 
Diseases, with recognition that successful implemen-
tation requires coordinated approaches that align 
sepsis protocols with antimicrobial stewardship objec-
tives at the institutional level, German Sepsis Society, 
Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine, Infectious 
Diseases Society of America, Japanese Society of 
Intensive Care Medicine, Latin American Sepsis 
Institute, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine, 
Society of Hospital Medicine, Surgical Infection 
Society, World Federation of Critical Care Nurses, 
and World Federation of Intensive and Critical Care 
Medicine.
 1 Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI.
 2 VA Center for Clinical Management Research, VA Ann Arbor 
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI.
 3 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, 
Fondazione Poiliclinico Universitario A.Gemelli IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
 4 Medical School, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, 
Italy.
 5 Health Research Center, Ministry of Defense Health 
Services, Riyadh, Saudi Arbia.
 6 Department of Critical Care and Internal Medicine, College 
of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, 
Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
 7 Department of Critical Care, College of Medicine, King 
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
 8 Department of Intensive Care, Copenhagen University 
Hospital—Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
 9 Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
 10 Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Abu 
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
 11 Academic Research Organization, Hospital Israelita Albert 
Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     65
 12 Divisions of Cardiology and Critical Care, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 13 Population Health Research Institute, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 14 World Health Research Trust, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 15 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Ghent University 
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
 16 Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.
 17 UMC Utrecht, Intensive Care Center, Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
 18 Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, Utrecht, 
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
 19 Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada.
 20 Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and 
Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 21 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
 22 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine; 
Department of Medicine; University of Miami Miller School 
of Medicine, Miami, FL.
 23 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, NY.
 24 Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Research 
Centre, School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, 
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
 25 Intensive Care Unit, Alfred Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
 26 Division of Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Mackenzie 
Health, Vaughan, ON, Canada.
 27 Division of Critical Care, Department of Medicine, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 28 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
 29 Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.
 30 Division of Critical Care, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.
 31 Divisions of Critical Care and Pulmonology, Department 
of Medicine, Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic 
Hospital and Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
 32 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Care and Pain 
Medicine, New York University, New York, NY.
 33 Department of Emergency Medicine, University College 
Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.
 34 Division of Acute Care Surgical Services, VCU Trauma, 
Richmond, VA.
 35 Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas 
(CONICET), Instituto de Investigación en Medicina y 
Ciencias de la Salud (IIMCS), Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad del Salvador (USAL), Ciudad de Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
 36 Escuela de Enfermería, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad 
del Salvador, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
 37 University of Pittsburgh, Schools of the Health Sciences, 
Pittsburgh, PA.
 38 Intensive Care Department, King Abdulaziz Medical City, 
Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, King Saud Bin 
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King Abdullah 
International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
 39 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Université Paris 
Cité, Paris, France.
 40 Biomedical Sciences Department, Humanitas University, 
Milan, Italy.
 41 IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Milan, Italy.
 42 Department of Emergency Medicine, Manila Doctors 
Hospital, Manila, Philippines.
 43 Department of Emergency Medicine, Corazon Locsin 
Montelibano Memorial Regional Hospital, Bacolod City, 
Philippines.
 44 Department of Emergency Medicine, Southern Philippines 
Medical Center, Davao City, Philippines.
 45 Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
 46 Medical ICU, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
 47 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Kyoto 
University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
 48 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
 49 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL.
 50 Intensive Care Department, SODIR Research Group. 
Hospital Vall d’Hebron. Barcelona, Spain.
 51 Department of Medicine, Universitat Autonoma Barcelona, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.
 52 Department of Critical Care Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
 53 Department of Critical Care, Hamilton Health Sciences, 
Hamilton, ON Canada.
 54 Department of Critical Care, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
 55 Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
 56 Department of Emergency, Hôpital Pitié-Salpetriere, 
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, France.
 57 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Division of Pulmonary 
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical 
Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
 58 Section of Hospital Medicine, Division of General Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Boston, MA.
 59 Critical Care Program, The George Institute for Global 
Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
 60 Malcolm Fisher Department of Intensive Care, Royal North 
Shore Hospital, Northern Sydney Local Health District, St 
Leonards, NSW, Australia.
Prescott et al
66     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
 61 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Ziauddin University, 
Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan.
 62 Department of Intensive Care medicine, Radboud University 
Medical Center Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
 63 Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD.
 64 Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns 
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD.
 65 Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Department of 
Clinical Sciences, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
 66 Walimu, Kampala, Uganda.
 67 Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston, 
MA.
 68 Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, MA.
 69 Department of Anaesthesia, Makerere University College of 
health sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
 70 Section of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
 71 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
 72 Hoag Hospital Memorial Presbyterian, Newport Beach, CA.
 73 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, 
Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI.
 74 Intensive Care Department, Hospital São Paulo, Escola 
Paulista de Medicina Universidade Federal de São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
 75 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Hospital Anchieta 
ICU Complex, Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.
 76 University of Brasília (UnB), Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.
 77 Escola Superior de Ciências da Saúde (ESCS), Brasília, 
Federal District, Brazil.
 78 Bethesda, MD.
 79 Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC.
 80 Section of Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Anesthesiology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC.
 81 School of Public Health, Monash University Victoria, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
 82 Healthcare Improvement Studies Institute, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
 83 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Iowa 
Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA.
 84 Department of Anesthesia Critical Care, University of Iowa 
Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA.
 85 Department of Epidemiology, University of Iowa College of 
Public Health, Iowa City, IA.
 86 Department of Anaesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain, Tata 
Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.
 87 Department of Intensive Care, Guy’s & St Thomas’ Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom.
 88 King’s College London, London, United Kingdom.
 89 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, The Queen 
Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
 90 Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
 91 School of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Monash 
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
 92 Institute of Infectious Diseases and Infection Control, Jena 
University Hospital/Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, 
Germany.
 93 Center for Sepsis Care and Control, Jena University 
Hospital/Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany.
 94 University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, 
Faculty of Health Medicine and Behavioural Sciences, 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
 95 Herston Infectious Diseases Institute (HeIDI), Metro North 
Health, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
 96 Division of Anesthesia Critical Care and Emergency and 
Pain Medicine, University of Montpellier, Nimes University 
Hospital, Nimes, France.
 97 Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Moinhos de 
Vento, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
 98 Postgraduate Program in Pneumological Sciences, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
Brazil.
 99 Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
 100 Department of Surgery Kalamazoo, Western Michigan 
University Homer Stryker MD, School of Medicine, MI.
 101 Cooper Research Institute (Critical Care), Camden, NJ.
 102 Cooper Medical School, Rowan University, Camden, NJ.
 103 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, 
University of Kansas, Kansas City, Kansas City, KS.
 104 Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China.
 105 Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
 106 Center for Infection and Molecular Medicine (CIMM), 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
 107 ESCMID Study Group for Bloodstream Infections, 
Endocarditis, and Sepsis (ESGBIES), European Society of 
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID), 
Basel, Switzerland.
 108 Adult Critical Care, St George’s University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
 109 Department of Surgery and Emory Critical Care Center, 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct 
URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the 
HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal’s website 
(http://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal).
Drs. Prescott and Antonelli are co-first authors.
Drs. Rhodes and Coopersmith are co-senior authors.
Dr. Fox-Robichaud reported serving as the scientific director 
of Sepsis Canada and as principal investigator (PI) on a study 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     67
funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Dr. Rhodes 
reported serving as an advisor for Maquet. Dr. Kwizera reported 
receiving research support from Fisher and Paykel and Vygon 
and serving as primary author on a trial funded by Wellcome 
Trust. Dr. Du reported serving as president of the Chinese 
Association of Critical Care Physicians and the Chinese College 
of Critical Care Medicine. Dr. Rochwerg reported membership 
on the American Thoracic Society (ATS) guideline committee for 
noninvasive respiratory support and the corticosteroids in sepsis 
guideline committee. Dr. Hodgson reported an executive role 
at Monash Partners, research support from the National Health 
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), and membership on 
the European Respiratory Society/ATS ICU rehabilitation guide-
line committee. Dr. Angus reported serving as a senior editor for 
JAMA. Dr. Azoulay reported receiving lecture fees from Baxter, 
Gilead, Alexion, and Pfizer. Dr. Machado reported serving as PI 
on the NOVA trial funded by Biolab, receiving speaking fees from 
BioMérieux, and serving as an advisor for Baxter. Dr. Prescott re-
ported serving as a consultant for Aurobac Therapeutics. Dr. De 
Waele reported serving as a consultant for Roche Diagnostics. Dr. 
Roberts reported serving as a consultant for BioMérieux and as 
primary author on a study funded by the NHMRC. Dr. McPeake 
reported serving as a consultant for AstraZeneca, with payments 
made to her institution. Dr. Wiersinga reported receiving research 
support from Moderna and serving as PI on a study funded by 
Amsterdam UMC. Dr. Kesecioglu reported receiving lecture 
honoraria from Dräger Medical Equipment. Dr. Doi reported re-
ceiving research support from Nipro and is a Council member of 
the Japanese Society of Intensive Care. Dr. Honarmand reported 
receiving research support from the Lawson Health Research 
Institute and serving on the ATS guideline committee for early 
mobilization. Dr. Evans reported serving as vice-chair of rapid 
response for CHEST and chair of the ABIM council. Dr. Alberto 
reported membership in the World Federation of Critical Care 
Nurses and serving as a reviewer for a systematic review funded 
by Universidad del Salvador. Dr. Heunks reported serving as a 
consultant for Liberate Medical and receiving research support 
from the ATS. Dr. Derde reported involvement in the IMPRINT 
and ECRAID-Base trials; receiving financial and drug contribu-
tions for the REMAP-CAP trial from Roche, Sanofi, SOBI, Faron, 
and Dimerix (all paid to her institution). Dr. Azevedo reported re-
ceiving speaking fees from Baxter, MSD, and Nestle. Dr. Hashmi 
reported membership in Asia Pacific Sepsis Alliance and ISARIC. 
Dr. Nunnally reported serving as co-chair of the Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign Research Committee and participating in activities 
for ASA, AHA, and SOCCA. Dr. Ostermann reported research 
support from Baxter and BioMérieux (paid to her institution) and 
coauthoring articles on hemoadsorption. Dr. Antonelli reported 
serving as an advisor for AstraZeneca, Grifols, Menarini, and 
Shionogi, and as a consultant for Baxter. Dr. Klompas reported 
receiving royalties from UpToDate and research support from the 
AHRQ and CDC. Dr. Gong reported serving as a section editor 
for Wolters Kluwer. Dr. Ego reported serving as vice-chair of the 
Japanese Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Dr. Moller reported 
sponsorship of the EMPRESS RCT. Dr. Leeies reported mem-
bership in the Canadian Critical Care Society and the Canadian 
Society for Transplantation. Dr. Hammond reported receiving re-
search support and IV fluids from Baxter Healthcare. Dr. Mohr 
reported serving as primary author on a study funded by AHRQ 
and HRSA and serving on the board of Society for Academic 
Emergency Medicine. Dr. Ferrer reported receiving speaking fees 
from Pfizer and owning stock in Grifols. Dr. Rosa reported re-
ceiving grants from the Brazilian Ministry of Health paid to his 
company. Dr. Sawyer reported receiving consultancy fees from 
Molnlycke, Shionogi, and AbbVie and research support from the 
NIH. Dr. Maves reported research support from AiCuris, Biotest, 
Geovax, and Merck (paid to his institution) and serving as a con-
sultant for Shionogi. Dr. Peake reported serving as co-PI on the 
ARISE FLUIDS trial. Dr. Jacob reported serving as PI and CSO 
for the STAIRS study. Dr. Oczkowski reported serving as a con-
sultant for VitalAire. Dr. McGloughlin reported serving as a con-
sultant for the WHO and as clinical director for the Australian 
Living Evidence Collaboration. Dr. Simpson reported serving 
on the editorial board of CHEST SEEK. Dr. Iwashyna reported 
coauthoring the Haines article. Dr. Arabi reported serving as PI 
on the SCREEN trial and chair of the Saudi Critical Care Society 
trials group. Dr. Freund reported serving as PI on the 1BED trial.
Drs. Prescott and Antonelli served as guidelines co-chairs. 
Drs. Alhazzani and Møller served as methods co-leads. Drs. 
Alshamsi, Azevedo, Belley-Cote, De Waele, Derde, Dionne, 
Evans, Gershengorn, Hodgson, Honarmand, Kesecioglu, 
McIntyre, Mer, Nunnally, Oczkowski, Rochwerg served in 
guidelines leadership roles. Akinola, Akuamoah-Boateng, 
Alberto, Angus, Arabi, Azoulay, Cecconi, Convocar, De 
Pascale, Doi, Du, Egi, Elie-Turenne, Ferrer, Fox-Robichaud, 
French, Freund, Gong, Hale, Hammond, Hashmi, Heunks, 
Iwashyna, Jacob, Klompas, Kwizera, Leeies, Lejnieks, Levy, 
Machado, Maia, Masur, Maves, McGloughlin, McPeake, Mohr, 
Myatra, Ostermann, Peake, Pletz, Roberts, Rosa, Sawyer, 
Schorr, Simpson, Weng, and Wiersinga, served as guidelines 
panelists. Drs. Rhodes and Coopersmith served as Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign Leaders.
For information regarding this article, E-mail: 
REFERENCES
 1. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al: The third in-
ternational consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock 
(Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315:801–810
 2. Reinhart K, Daniels R, Kissoon N, et al: Recognizing sepsis 
as a global health priority - A WHO resolution. N Engl J Med 
2017; 377:414–417
 3. Meyer NJ, Prescott HC: Sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J 
Med 2024; 391:2133–2146
 4. Rudd KE, Johnson SC, Agesa KM, et al: Global, regional, 
and national sepsis incidence and mortality, 1990-2017: 
Analysis for the global burden of disease study. Lancet 2020; 
395:200–211
 5. Global Sepsis Alliance. 2030 Global Agenda for 
Sepsis; Making the Next Success Story in Global 
Health. Available at: https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/58a7025b8419c215b30b2df3/t/67d1879b8dbfb0
6f8c3be697/1741784989573/2030_Global_Agenda_for_
Sepsis_Online.pdf. Accessed September 27 , 2025
 6. Collaborators, G.B.D.G.S.: Global, regional, and national sepsis 
incidence and mortality, 1990-2021: A systematic analysis. 
Lancet Glob Health 2025; 13:e2013–e2026
 7 . Prescott HC, Angus DC: Enhancing recovery from sepsis: A 
review. JAMA 2018; 319:62–75
Prescott et al
68     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
 8. Fleischmann-Struzek C, Born S, Kesselmeier M, et al: 
Functional dependence following intensive care unit-treated 
sepsis: three-year follow-up results from the prospective Mid-
German Sepsis Cohort (MSC). Lancet Reg Health Eur 2024; 
46:101066
 9. Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, Moberg J, et al; GRADE 
Working Group: GRADE evidence to decision (EtD) frame-
works: A systematic and transparent approach to making 
well informed healthcare choices. 1: Introduction. BMJ 2016; 
353:i2016
 10. Santesso N, Glenton C, Dahm P, et al; GRADE Working Group: 
GRADE guidelines 26: Informative statements to communi-
cate the findings of systematic reviews of interventions. J Clin 
Epidemiol 2020; 119:126–135
 11. Guyatt GH, Schünemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, et al: Guideline 
panels should not GRADE good practice statements. J Clin 
Epidemiol 2015; 68:597–600
 12. Guyatt GH, Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, et al: Guideline 
panels should seldom make good practice statements: 
Guidance from the GRADE Working Grou. J Clin Epidemiol 
2016; 80:3–7
 13. Freund Y, Cancella de Abreu M, Lebal S, et al: Effect of the 1-h 
bundle on mortality in patients with suspected sepsis in the 
emergency department: A stepped wedge cluster randomized 
clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50:1086–1095
 14. Arabi YM, Alsaawi A, Alzahrani M, et al; SCREEN Trial 
Group and the Saudi Critical Care Trials Group: Electronic 
sepsis screening among patients admitted to hospital wards: 
A stepped-wedge cluster randomized trial. JAMA 2025; 
333:763–773
 15. Damiani E, Donati A, Serafini G, et al: Effect of performance 
improvement programs on compliance with sepsis bundles 
and mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis of ob-
servational studies. PLoS One 2015; 10:e0125827
 16. Levy MM, Gesten FC, Phillips GS, et al: Mortality changes as-
sociated with mandated public reporting for sepsis. The results 
of the New York state initiative. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2018; 198:1406–1412
 17 . Kahn JM, Davis BS, Yabes JG, et al: Association between 
state-mandated protocolized sepsis care and in-hospital mor-
tality among adults with sepsis. JAMA 2019; 322:240–250
 18. Levy MM, Dellinger RP, Townsend SR, et al: The Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign: Results of an international guideline-based 
performance improvement program targeting severe sepsis. 
Intensive Care Med 2010; 36:222–231
 19. Tarabichi Y, Cheng A, Bar-Shain D, et al: Improving timeliness 
of antibiotic administration using a provider and pharmacist 
facing sepsis early warning system in the emergency depart-
ment setting: A randomized controlled quality improvement in-
itiative. Crit Care Med 2022; 50:418–427
 20. CDC: Hospital Sepsis Program Core Elements. 2023. 
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/media/pdfs/sepsis-
core-elements-H.pdf Accessed August 14, 2025
 21. Prescott HC, Posa PJ, Dantes R: The centers for disease con-
trol and prevention’s hospital sepsis program core elements. 
JAMA 2023; 330:1617–1618
 22. Scheer CS, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Ferrer R, et al; European 
Sepsis Care Study Group: Status of sepsis care in european 
hospitals: Results from an international cross-sectional survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2025; 211:587–599
 23. Dantes RB, Kaur H, Bouwkamp BA, et al: Sepsis program 
activities in acute care hospitals - national healthcare safety 
network, United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2023; 72:907–911
 24. Schwarzkopf D, Rüddel H, Brinkmann A, et al: The german 
quality network sepsis: evaluation of a quality collaborative on 
decreasing sepsis-related mortality in a controlled interrupted 
time series analysis. Front Med (Lausanne) 2022; 9:882340
 25. Schoffelen T, Papan C, Carrara E, et al; ESCMID Study Group 
for Antimicrobial Stewardship (ESGAP): European society 
of clinical microbiology and infectious diseases guidelines 
for antimicrobial stewardship in emergency departments 
(endorsed by European association of hospital pharmacists). 
Clin Microbiol Infect 2024; 30:1384–1407
 26. Guirgis FW, Jones L, Esma R, et al: Managing sepsis: Electronic 
recognition, rapid response teams, and standardized care save 
lives. J Crit Care 2017; 40:296–302
 27 . Garcia-Lopez L, Grau-Cerrato S, de Frutos-Soto A, et al; 
Grupo de Trabajo Multidisciplinar en Código Sepsis del 
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid: Impact of the im-
plementation of a Sepsis Code hospital protocol in antibiotic 
prescription and clinical outcomes in an intensive care unit. 
Med Intensiva 2017; 41:12–20
 28. Arabi YM, Al-Dorzi HM, Alamry A, et al: The impact of a mul-
tifaceted intervention including sepsis electronic alert system 
and sepsis response team on the outcomes of patients with 
sepsis and septic shock. Ann Intensive Care 2017; 7:57
 29. Peltan ID, Bledsoe JR, Jacobs JR, et al: Effectiveness 
and safety of an emergency department code sepsis pro-
tocol: A pragmatic clinical trial. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2024; 
21:1560–1571
 30. Jones SL, Ashton CM, Kiehne L, et al: Reductions in sepsis 
mortality and costs after design and implementation of a 
nurse-based early recognition and response program. Jt 
Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2015; 41:483–491
 31. Song J, et al: The effect of the intelligent sepsis management 
system on outcomes among patients with sepsis and septic 
shock diagnosed according to the sepsis-3 definition in the 
emergency department. J Clin Med 2019; 8
 32. Shah T, Sterk E, Rech MA: Emergency department sepsis 
screening tool decreases time to antibiotics in patients with 
sepsis. Am J Emerg Med 2018; 36:1745–1748
 33. Champunot R, Kamsawang N, Thimsri D, et al: Effects on out-
come of patients with severe sepsis and septic shock admitted 
to the ICU after implementation cooperative sepsis manage-
ment protocol. Crit Care 2012; 16(Suppl 3):104
 34. Elias R, MacPherson-Dias R, Kurtz A, et al: ICU sepsis response 
team and septic shock mortality: A pre-post intervention study. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199:A7175–A7175
 35. Schinkel M, Holleman F, Vleghels R, et al: The impact of a 
sepsis performance improvement program in the emergency 
department: A before-after intervention study. Infection 2023; 
51:945–954
 36. Rosenqvist M, Fagerstrand E, Lanbeck P, et al: Sepsis alert - 
a triage model that reduces time to antibiotics and length of 
hospital stay. Infect Dis (Lond) 2017; 49:507–513
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     69
 37 . McDonald CM, West S, Dushenski D, et al: Sepsis now a pri-
ority: A quality improvement initiative for early sepsis recogni-
tion and care. Int J Qual Health Care 2018; 30:802–809
 38. Threatt DL: Improving sepsis bundle implementation times: 
A nursing process improvement approach. J Nurs Care Qual 
2020; 35:135–139
 39. Rosenqvist M, Bengtsson-Toni M, Tham J, et al: Improved out-
comes after regional implementation of sepsis alert: A novel 
triage model. Crit Care Med 2020; 48:484–490
 40. Roman CP, Dooley M, Nevill A, et al: Introduction of an emer-
gency medicine pharmacist-led sepsis alert response system 
in the emergency department: A cohort study. Emerg Med 
Australas 2023; 35:564–571
 41. Patocka C, Turner J, Xue X, et al: Evaluation of an emergency 
department triage screening tool for suspected severe sepsis 
and septic shock. J Healthc Qual 2014; 36:52–61; quiz 59
 42. Hayden GE, Tuuri RE, Scott R, et al: Triage sepsis alert and 
sepsis protocol lower times to fluids and antibiotics in the ED. 
Am J Emerg Med 2016; 34:1–9
 43. Borrelli G, Koch E, Sterk E, et al: Early recognition of sepsis 
through emergency medical services pre-hospital screening. 
Am J Emerg Med 2019; 37:1428–1432
 44. Troncoso R Jr, Garfinkel EM, Hinson JS, et al: Do prehospital 
sepsis alerts decrease time to complete CMS sepsis meas-
ures? Am J Emerg Med 2023; 71:81–85
 45. Idrees M, Macdonald S, Kodali K: Sepsis early alert tool: Early 
recognition and timely management in the emergency depart-
ment. Emerg Med Australas 2016; 28:399–403
 46. Moore WR, Vermuelen A, Taylor R, et al: Improving 3-hour 
sepsis bundled care outcomes: Implementation of a nurse-
driven sepsis protocol in the emergency department. J Emerg 
Nurs 2019; 45:690–698
 47 . Currie KE, Barry H, Scanlan JM, et al: Impact of a multidiscipli-
nary sepsis huddle in the emergency department. Am J Emerg 
Med 2023; 64:150–154
 48. Petit J, Passerieux J, Maître O, et al; qSOFAST study group: 
Impact of a qSOFA-based triage procedure on antibiotic tim-
ing in ED patients with sepsis: A prospective interventional 
study. Am J Emerg Med 2020; 38:477–484
 49. Austrian JS, Jamin CT, Doty GR, et al: Impact of an emergency 
department electronic sepsis surveillance system on patient 
mortality and length of stay. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2018; 
25:523–529
 50. Williams G, Alberto L, Taha M, et al: The challenges of compli-
ance with sepsis management protocols in low and low-middle 
income countries - A cross-sectional study. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 2025; 90:104032
 51. Pedersen PB, Henriksen DP, Mikkelsen S, et al: Dispatch 
and prehospital transport for acute septic patients: An ob-
servational study. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med 2017; 
25:51
 52. Groenewoudt M, Roest AA, Leijten FMM, et al: Septic patients 
arriving with emergency medical services: A seriously ill popu-
lation. Eur J Emerg Med 2014; 21:330–335
 53. Loza-Gomez A, Hofmann E, NokLam C, et al: Severe sepsis 
and septic shock in patients transported by prehospital serv-
ices versus walk in patients to the emergency department. Am 
J Emerg Med 2021; 45:173–178
 54. Lin CB, Peterson ED, Smith EE, et al: Emergency medical ser-
vice hospital prenotification is associated with improved evalu-
ation and treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual Outcomes 2012; 5:514–522
 55. Bradley EH, Herrin J, Wang Y, et al: Strategies for reducing the 
door-to-balloon time in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J 
Med 2006; 355:2308–2320
 56. Smyth MA, Brace-McDonnell SJ, Perkins GD: Identification of 
adults with sepsis in the prehospital environment: A systematic 
review. BMJ Open 2016; 6:e011218
 57 . Oanesa RD, Su TW, Weissman A: Evidence for use of validated 
sepsis screening tools in the prehospital population: A scoping 
review. Prehosp Emerg Care 2024; 28:485–493
 58. Lane D, Ichelson RI, Drennan IR, et al: Prehospital manage-
ment and identification of sepsis by emergency medical serv-
ices: A systematic review. Emerg Med J 2016; 33:408–413
 59. Piedmont S, Goldhahn L, Swart E, et al: Sepsis incidence, sus-
picion, prediction and mortality in emergency medical serv-
ices: A cohort study related to the current international sepsis 
guideline. Infection 2024; 52:1325–1335
 60. Kumar A, Abbenbroek B, Delaney A, et al: Sepsis triggers and 
tools to support early identification in healthcare settings: An 
integrative review. Aust Crit Care 2023; 36:1117–1128
 61. Hunter CL, Silvestri S, Stone A, et al: Prehospital sepsis alert 
notification decreases time to initiation of CMS sepsis core 
measures. Am J Emerg Med 2019; 37:114–117
 62. Guerra WF, Mayfield TR, Meyers MS, et al: Early detection and 
treatment of patients with severe sepsis by prehospital per-
sonnel. J Emerg Med 2013; 44:1116–1125
 63. Mixon M, Dietrich S, Floren M, et al: Time to antibiotic admin-
istration: Sepsis alerts called in emergency department versus 
in the field via emergency medical services. Am J Emerg Med 
2021; 44:291–295
 64. Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna T J, et al: Assessment of clinical 
criteria for sepsis: For the third international consensus defi-
nitions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 
315:762–774
 65. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: International guidelines for management of 
sepsis and septic shock 2021. Intensive Care Med 2021; 
47:1181–1247
 66. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: International guidelines for management of sepsis 
and septic shock 2021. Crit Care Med 2021; 49:e1063–e1143
 67 . Fernando SM, Tran A, Taljaard M, et al: Prognostic accuracy 
of the quick sequential organ failure assessment for mortality 
in patients with suspected infection: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2018; 168:266–275
 68. Herwanto V, Shetty A, Nalos M, et al: Accuracy of quick se-
quential organ failure assessment score to predict sepsis 
mortality in 121 studies including 1,716,017 individuals: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Explor 2019; 
1:e0043
 69. Serafim R, Gomes JA, Salluh J, et al: A comparison of the 
quick-SOFA and systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
criteria for the diagnosis of sepsis and prediction of mor-
tality: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2018; 
153:646–655
Prescott et al
70     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
 70. Adegbite BR, Edoa JR, Ndzebe Ndoumba WF, et al: A comparison 
of different scores for diagnosis and mortality prediction of adults 
with sepsis in Low-and-Middle-Income Countries: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine 2021; 42:101184
 71. Chua WL, Rusli KDB, Aitken LM: Early warning scores for 
sepsis identification and prediction of in-hospital mortality in 
adults with sepsis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Clin Nurs 2024; 33:2005–2018
 72. Elperin J, Van Perre K, Bryant NH: 1193: Sepsis: Is it time to 
leave sirs behind? A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
sepsis definitions. Crit Care Med 2023; 51:59
 73. Qiu X, Lei Y, Zhou RX: SIRS, SOFA, qSOFA, and NEWS in 
the diagnosis of sepsis and prediction of adverse outcomes: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Expert Rev Anti Infect 
Ther 2023; 21:891–900
 74. Machado FR, Cavalcanti AB, Monteiro MB, et al; Instituto 
Latino-Americano de Sepsis network investigators: Predictive 
accuracy of the quick sepsis-related organ failure assessment 
score in brazil. A prospective multicenter study. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2020; 201:789–798
 75. Islam MM, Nasrin T, Walther BA, et al: Prediction of sepsis 
patients using machine learning approach: A meta-analysis. 
Comput Methods Programs Biomed 2019; 170:1–9
 76. Haas R, McGill SR: Artificial Intelligence for the prediction of 
sepsis in adults. Can J Health Tech 2022; 2 
 77 . Crouser ED, Parrillo JE, Seymour CW, et al: Monocyte distribu-
tion width: A novel indicator of sepsis-2 and sepsis-3 in high-
risk emergency department patients. Crit Care Med 2019; 
47:1018–1025
 78. Crouser ED, Parrillo JE, Seymour C, et al: Improved early de-
tection of sepsis in the ED with a novel monocyte distribution 
width biomarker. Chest 2017; 152:518–526
 79. O’Neal HR Jr, Sheybani R, Kraus CK, et al: Cellular host re-
sponse sepsis test for risk stratification of patients in the 
emergency department: A pooled analysis. Acad Emerg Med 
2024; 31:883–893
 80. O’Neal HR Jr, Sheybani R, Caffery TS, et al: Assessment of a 
cellular host response test to risk-stratify suspected COVID-
19 patients in the emergency department setting. PLoS One 
2022; 17:e0264220
 81. Balk R, Esper AM, Martin GS, et al: Validation of SeptiCyte 
RAPID to discriminate sepsis from non-infectious systemic in-
flammation. J Clin Med 2024; 13:1194
 82. Liesenfeld O, Arora S, Aufderheide TP, et al: Clinical validation 
of an AI-based blood testing device for diagnosis and prognosis 
of acute infection and sepsis. Nat Med 2025; 31:4044–4054 
 83. Bhargava A, López-Espina C, Schmalz L, et al: FDA-authorized 
AI/ML tool for sepsis prediction: Development and validation. 
NEJM AI 2024; 1
 84. Mai B, Zhou L, Wang Q, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of pancre-
atic stone protein in patients with sepsis: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis 2024; 24:472
 85. Martin-Loeches I, Singer M, Leone M: Sepsis: Key insights, 
future directions, and immediate goals. A review and expert 
opinion. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50:2043–2049
 86. Stephen AH, Montoya RL, Aluisio AR: Sepsis and septic shock 
in low- and middle-income countries. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 
2020; 21:571–578
 87 . Prescott HC: The epidemiology of sepsis. In: Wersinga WJ, 
Seymour CW, eds. Handbook of sepsis. Cham, Switzerland, 
Springer International Publishing, 2018: 15–28
 88. Lamy B, Dargère S, Arendrup MC, et al: How to optimize 
the use of blood cultures for the diagnosis of blood-
stream infections? A state-of-the art. Front Microbiol  
2016; 7:697
 89. Vashti A, Mullan PJ, Nitzberg M: Single-site sampling strategy 
versus multi-site sampling strategy in blood culture collec-
tion within the hospital setting: A systematic review. Am J 
Infect Control 2025; 53:1113–1120
 90. Ntusi N, Aubin L, Oliver S, et al: Guideline for the optimal use 
of blood cultures. S Afr Med J 2010; 100:839–843
 91. Fabre V, Sharara SL, Salinas AB, et al: Does this patient need 
blood cultures? A scoping review of indications for blood 
cultures in adult nonneutropenic inpatients. Clin Infect Dis 
2020; 71:1339–1347
 92. Papavarnavas NS, et al.: Practice update to optimise the per-
formance and interpretation of blood cultures: 2022. S Afr 
Med J 2022; 112:397–402
 93. S3-Leitlinie: Sepsis – Prävention, Diagnose, Therapie 
und Nachsorge – Update 2025. Available at: https://reg-
ister.awmf.org/assets/guidelines/079-001l_S3_Sepsis-
Praevention-Diagnose-Therapie-Nachsorge_2025-07 .pdf 
Accessed August 12, 2025
 94. Miller JM, Binnicker MJ, Campbell S, et al: A guide to utiliza-
tion of the microbiology laboratory for diagnosis of infectious 
diseases: 2018 update by the infectious diseases society 
of America and the American society for microbiology. Clin 
Infect Dis 2018; 67:813–816
 95. Towns ML, Jarvis WR, Hsueh PR: Guidelines on blood cul-
tures. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2010; 43:347–349
 96. Weinstein MP, Reller LB, Murphy JR, et al: The clinical sig-
nificance of positive blood cultures: A comprehensive anal-
ysis of 500 episodes of bacteremia and fungemia in adults. 
I. Laboratory and epidemiologic observations. Rev Infect Dis 
1983; 5:35–53
 97 . Grohs P, Mainardi J-L, Podglajen I, et al: Relevance of rou-
tine use of the anaerobic blood culture bottle. J Clin Microbiol 
2007; 45:2711–2715
 98. Lafaurie M, d'Anglejan E, Donay JL, et al: Utility of anaerobic 
bottles for the diagnosis of bloodstream infections. BMC 
Infect Dis 2020; 20:142
 99. Chandler MT, Morton ES, Byrd RP, et al: Reevaluation of an-
aerobic blood cultures in a Veteran population. South Med J 
2000; 93:986–988
 100. Yarahmadi S, Ebrahimzadeh F, Mohamadipour F, et al: Effect 
of prone position on clinical outcomes of nonintubated 
patients with COVID-19: A randomised clinical trial. Collegian 
2023; 30:449–456
 101. Cheng MP, Stenstrom R, Paquette K, et al; FABLED 
Investigators: Blood culture results before and after anti-
microbial administration in patients with severe manifesta-
tions of sepsis: A diagnostic study. Ann Intern Med 2019; 
171:547–554
 102. Liu C, Bayer A, Cosgrove SE, et al: Clinical practice guide-
lines by the infectious diseases society of America for the 
treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     71
infections in adults and children: Executive summary. Clin 
Infect Dis 2011; 52:285–292
 103. Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes DR, et al: Clinical practice 
guideline for the management of candidiasis: 2016 update 
by the infectious diseases society of America. Clin Infect Dis 
2016; 62:e1–50
 104. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: International guidelines for management of 
sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med 2017; 
43:304–377
 105. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: international guidelines for management 
of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Crit Care Med 2017; 
45:486–552
 106. Liu V, Morehouse JW, Soule J, et al: Fluid volume, lactate 
values, and mortality in sepsis patients with intermediate lac-
tate values. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2013; 10:466–473
 107 . Shankar-Hari M, Phillips GS, Levy ML, et al; Sepsis 
Definitions Task Force: Developing a new definition and 
assessing new clinical criteria for septic shock: For the third 
international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic 
shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315:775–787
 108. Liu VX, Morehouse JW, Marelich GP, et al: Multicenter imple-
mentation of a treatment bundle for patients with sepsis and 
intermediate lactate values. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016; 
193:1264–1270
 109. Kuttab HI, Lykins JD, Hughes MD, et al: Evaluation 
and predictors of fluid resuscitation in patients with 
severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 2019; 
47:1582–1590
 110. Corl KA, Levy MM, Holder AL, et al: Moderate IV fluid re-
suscitation is associated with decreased sepsis mortality. Crit 
Care Med 2024; 52:e557–e567
 111. Peake SL, Delaney A, Bellomo R; ARISE Investigators: Goal-
directed resuscitation in septic shock. N Engl J Med 2015; 
372:190–191
 112. Pro CI, et al.: A randomized trial of protocol-based care for 
early septic shock. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:1683–1693
 113. Mouncey PR, Osborn TM, Power GS, et al; ProMISe Trial 
Investigators: Trial of early, goal-directed resuscitation for 
septic shock. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:1301–1311
 114. Investigators P, et al.: Early, goal-directed therapy for septic 
shock - A patient-level meta-analysis. N Engl J Med 2017; 
376:2223–2234
 115. Ward MA, Kuttab HI, Badgett RG: The effect of early fluid 
resuscitation on mortality in sepsis: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2025; 53:e1790–e1802
 116. Taylor SP, Karvetski CH, Templin MA, et al: Initial fluid resus-
citation following adjusted body weight dosing is associated 
with improved mortality in obese patients with suspected 
septic shock. J Crit Care 2018; 43:7–12
 117 . Lemmens HJ, Bernstein D, Brodsky JB: Estimating blood 
volume in obese and morbidly obese patients. Obes Surg 
2006; 16:773–776
 118. Anderson MR, Shashaty MGS: Impact of obesity in critical 
illness. Chest 2021; 160:2135–2145
 119. Gendreau S, Frapard T, Carteaux G, et al: Geo-economic 
influence on the effect of fluid volume for sepsis 
resuscitation: A meta-analysis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2024; 209:517–528
 120. Morton B, Stolbrink M, Kagima W, et al: The early recognition 
and management of sepsis in sub-saharan African adults: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 2018; 15:2017
 121. Andrews B, Semler MW, Muchemwa L, et al: Effect of an 
early resuscitation protocol on in-hospital mortality among 
adults with sepsis and hypotension: A randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA 2017; 318:1233–1240
 122. Andrews B, Muchemwa L, Kelly P, et al: Simplified severe 
sepsis protocol: a randomized controlled trial of modified 
early goal-directed therapy in Zambia. Crit Care Med 2014; 
42:2315–2324
 122a. Devine BJ: Gentamicin therapy. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1974; 
8:650
 123. Mekontso Dessap A, AlShamsi F, Belletti A, et al; European 
Society of Intensive Care Medicine: European Society of 
Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) 2025 clinical practice 
guideline on fluid therapy in adult critically ill patients: Part 
2-the volume of resuscitation fluids. Intensive Care Med 
2025; 51:461–477
 124. Ahn C, Yu G, Shin TG, et al: Comparison of early and late 
norepinephrine administration in patients with septic shock: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2024; 
166:1417–1430
 125. Permpikul C, Tongyoo S, Viarasilpa T, et al: Early use of norepi-
nephrine in septic shock resuscitation (CENSER). A random-
ized trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199:1097–1105
 126. Varpula M, Tallgren M, Saukkonen K, et al: Hemodynamic 
variables related to outcome in septic shock. Intensive Care 
Med 2005; 31:1066–1071
 127 . Shi R, Braïk R, Monnet X, et al: Early norepinephrine for 
patients with septic shock: An updated systematic review 
and meta-analysis with trial sequential analysis. Crit Care 
2025; 29:182
 128. Li Y, Li H, Zhang D: Timing of norepinephrine initiation in 
patients with septic shock: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Crit Care 2020; 24:488
 129. Zhou HX, Yang C-F, Wang H-Y, et al: Should we initiate vaso-
pressors earlier in patients with septic shock: A mini sys-
temic review. World J Crit Care Med 2023; 12:204–216
 130. Elbouhy MA, Soliman M, Gaber A, et al: Early use of norepi-
nephrine improves survival in septic shock: Earlier than early. 
Arch Med Res 2019; 50:325–332
 131. Bai X, Yu W, Ji W, et al: Early versus delayed administration of 
norepinephrine in patients with septic shock. Crit Care 2014; 
18:532
 132. Colon Hidalgo D, Patel J, Masic D, et al: Delayed vasopressor 
initiation is associated with increased mortality in patients 
with septic shock. J Crit Care 2020; 55:145–148
 133. National Heart L, et al.: Early restrictive or liberal fluid man-
agement for sepsis-induced hypotension. N Engl J Med 
2023; 388:499–510
 134. Owen VS, Rosgen BK, Cherak SJ, et al: Adverse events 
associated with administration of vasopressor medications 
through a peripheral intravenous catheter: A systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2021; 25:146
Prescott et al
72     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
 135. Tian DH, Smyth C, Keijzers G, et al: Safety of peripheral ad-
minis
