--- 27 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using empirical antifungal 
therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Empiric antifungal therapy should 
be considered on a case-by-case basis 
in selected patients with sepsis or septic 
shock and risk factors for fungal infection, 
including immunosuppression, prolonged use 
of antibiotics, prolonged hospitalization, and 
intra-abdominal sources of infection. Revisited
 
Sepsis and septic shock due to fungi are most commonly 
observed in patients in the ICU and are associated with 
poor outcomes (103, 238–241). While prompt initiation 
of early appropriate empiric antibacterial therapy is war -
ranted in adults with sepsis or septic shock, the impact 
of adding empiric antifungal therapy is less certain (239, 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     27242–244). Although patients with sepsis or septic shock 
may not benefit from empiric antifungals in general, 
selected patients with a high absolute risk for fungal in-
fection probably will benefit. Risk factors for fungal in-
fection include immunosuppression, prolonged exposure 
to antibacterial drugs, prolonged hospitalization, and an 
intra-abdominal source of infection (245).
We identified a relevant systematic review and 
meta-analysis of seven RCTs (246), including the 
EMPIRICUS trial (247). No additional trials were 
identified, and the evidence base was unchanged from 
the 2021 SSC guidelines (65, 66).


--- 28 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock without 
risk factors for anaerobic infection, we “suggest” 
using an empiric antibiotic regimen without 
anaerobic coverage.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of 
evidence)
Remark: When coverage of potential multidrug-
resistant (MDR) pathogens is required, agents 
with anaerobic activity (e.g., piperacillin–
tazobactam or carbapenems) are appropriate 
when alternative agents lacking anaerobic

--- 29 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock with 
specific risk factors for anaerobic infection, we 
“suggest” using an empiric antibiotic regimen 
that includes anaerobic coverage.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of 
evidence)
Remark: Risk factors for anaerobic infection include 
intra-abdominal or deep seated gynecological/
obstetric source of infection, necrotizing soft-
tissue infection, head and neck infection, and CNS 
abscesses or empyema.New
The prevalence of sepsis and septic shock due to an-
aerobic bacteria is low, compared with aerobic bacteria 
and fungi (217). Prompt initiation of appropriate em-
piric antimicrobial therapy is warranted in adults with 
sepsis or septic shock, and the decision to include or 
withhold anaerobic coverage depends on the anatom-
ical site of infection, which influences likelihood of an-
aerobic infection (249). Patients with sepsis or septic 
shock, particularly of lung or urinary origin, are un-
likely to benefit from empiric anaerobic coverage; by 
contrast, selected patients with specific risk factors 
for anaerobic infection will likely benefit (250, 251). 
Clinical scenarios with increased risk of anaerobic in-
fection include intra-abdominal, gynecological, and 
obstetric sources of infection, necrotizing soft-tissue 
infection, head and neck infection, empyema, and 
CNS abscesses (252, 253).
We identified a relevant systematic review and meta-
analysis of two RCTs (254) that comprised the primary 
evidence base. Fur

--- 30 ---
There is “insufficient evidence” to make a 
recommendation regarding use of departmental 
(i.e., ICU-wide) microbiological surveillance 
samples of the upper respiratory tract to guide 
empirical antimicrobial therapy. New
 
Infections with multidrug-resistant organisms, espe-
cially healthcare-associated infections, are a global 
concern (262). Active surveillance cultures can be used 
to identify patients colonized with multidrug-resistant 
organisms, which may inform preventive measures, 
including isolation; to reduce transmission; and to 
guide empiric antimicrobial therapy (217, 263). Active 
surveillance cultures of the upper respiratory tract may 
be particularly useful to guide empiric antimicrobial 
therapy of respiratory infections, including ventilator-
associated pneumonia (V AP).
We identified two systematic reviews on screening 
strategies (264, 265), implemented at the department 
or unit level, to detect carbapenem-resistant gram- 
negative bacteria, but none of the included trials 
assessed microbiological surveillance samples of the 
upper respiratory tract. We also identified an older 
diagnostic test accuracy review, but no relevant clin-
ical outcomes were assessed (266). Thus, the body of 
evidence was insufficient to make a recommenda-
tion regarding the use of microbiological surveillance samples of the upper respiratory tract to guide empir -
ical antimicrobial therapy.
“In our practice, ” 36% of the panel uses depart-
mental surveillance samples of 

--- 31 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” using pathogen-specific rapid 
diagnostic tests on a case-by-case basis in 
selected patients based on clinical features, local 
pathogen- and resistance patterns, seasonality, 
and availability of tests and antibiotic stewardship 
guidance.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence) New 
Pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests are used to guide 
empiric antimicrobial therapy (268). Such tests may in-
clude molecular PCR-based tests, phenotypic assays, res-
piratory and other syndromic panels, or antimicrobial 
resistance detection, each offering either rapid identifi-
cation of pathogens or resistance detection to guide anti-
microbial therapy. This may enable clinicians to better 
target antimicrobial therapy, thereby improving clinical 
outcomes and reducing both the unnecessary prescrip-
tion of broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy and the 
development of antimicrobial resistance.
We identified a relevant systematic review and 
meta-analysis of 6 RCTs (269) and supplemented this 
with one additional RCT since its publication (270). 
The review included trials assessing different types 
of pathogen-specific rapid diagnostic tests, including 
molecular testing platforms and phenotypic assays in 
adults with bloodstream infection.
There was possibly little to no difference in short-
term mortality with the use of pathogen-specific rapid 
diagnostic tests, as compared with not using them (RR 
1.03; 95% CI, 0.78–

--- 32 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest against” using Candida fungal 
biomarkers to guide initiation of empiric 
antifungal therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Use of Candida biomarkers to guide 
initiation of empiric antifungal therapy may be 
considered on a case-by-case basis in selected 
patients at high risk of Candida infection, 
including those with immunosuppression, 
prolonged exposure to antibiotics, prolonged 
hospitalization, and intra-abdominal source of 
infection. New 
Sepsis and septic shock caused by fungi are less 
common but associated with poor outcomes (103, 238–241). Although it is crucial to start appropriate 
empiric antibacterial therapy promptly in adults with 
sepsis or septic shock, the benefit of adding empiric 
antifungal therapy remains uncertain (239, 242–244). 
Antifungal therapy is associated with clinically impor -
tant undesirable effects, including drug-drug interac-
tions, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, hyponatremia, 
phototoxicity, visual disturbances, encephalopathy, 
peripheral neuropathy, and selection of resistant fungi 
(275–278). Empiric use of antifungal therapy is there-
fore not indicated for all patients with sepsis or septic 
shock, but may be beneficial in selected patients at high 
absolute risk of fungal infection. Generally, patients 
with sepsis or septic shock may not benefit from em-
piric antifungals, but utilizing fungal biomarkers may 
help identify patients who may b

--- 33 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” using prolonged infusion of 
beta-lactams for maintenance (after an initial 
loading dose) over bolus administration.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
Key pharmacokinetic parameters of beta-lactam antibi-
otics can change in patients with sepsis and septic shock, 
potentially leading to sub-therapeutic concentrations 
(281, 282). Unlike traditional intermittent bolus infusion 
(lasting 30 min or less), administering beta-lactam anti-
biotics via prolonged IV infusion—either as an extended 
infusion (over at least half of the dosing interval) or as a 
continuous infusion—maintains consistent beta-lactam 
concentrations that maximize the pharmacodynamics 
of these drugs (283, 284). The shorter the half-life of the 
drug, the greater the impact of extended or continuous 
infusion has on drug concentrations. Whether the pro-
longed infusion translated into improved outcomes was 
previously unclear, but additional evidence from large 
RCTs has become available.
We identified a recent systematic review and meta-
analysis of 18 RCTs (9,108 participants) (285), in-
cluding the large international BLING III RCT (286). 
Meta-analysis of these trials showed that prolonged 
infusions reduce short-term mortality (RR 0.91; 95% 
CI, 0.85–0.97, high certainty, which translates to 25 
fewer deaths per 1,000 patients, 95% CI, 42 fewer to 
8 fewer). In the one RCT that assessed days alive out-
side of ICU an

--- 34 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” using antimicrobial therapeutic drug 
monitoring (TDM) on a case-by-case basis in 
selected patients, based on clinical features, 
local pathogen- and resistance patterns, drug 
class, and availability of TDM.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
Antimicrobial therapy is subject to changes in pharma-
cokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) properties 
in sepsis and septic shock (291, 292). This may result 
in concentrations that are either too low (risking clin-
ical failure) or too high (potentially leading to toxicity) 
(293). Augmented renal clearance (294), acute kidney 
injury (295), hypoalbuminemia (296), RRT (297, 298), 
extracorporeal life support (299, 300), and other con-
ditions affect concentrations of many antimicrobials 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     31in critically ill patients. Therapeutic drug monitoring 
(TDM) is a dosing intervention applying PK/PD prin-
ciples that may result in more effective and safe dosing 
of antimicrobial therapy (301).
We identified a recent systematic review and meta-
analysis of eight RCTs (1241 participants) (302) with 
6 trials assessing TDM of antibacterials and two trials 
assessing TDM of antifungals. The results of the meta-
analysis were uncertain (very low certainty evidence). 
However, point estimates suggested a possible reduc-
tion in short-term mortality with the use of TDM, 
as compared with not using

--- 35 ---
Clinicians should continuously reevaluate 
patients, search for alternative diagnoses, 
and discontinue empiric antimicrobial 
therapy if an alternative cause of illness 
is demonstrated or strongly suspected 
in adults with suspected sepsis or septic 
shock but unconfirmed infection.
(good practice statement) Revisited

--- 36 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” de-escalation of antimicro-
bial therapy over no de-escalation when a 
confirmed microbiological diagnosis and 
susceptibility profile is available.
(strong recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: De-escalation involves discontinuing 
unnecessary antimicrobial therapy or nar-
rowing the spectrum of antimicrobial agents 
where appropriate.Revisited

--- 37 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” de-escalation of antimicrobial therapy 
over no de-escalation when no pathogens are 
identified on final culture results.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence)Revisited
Antimicrobial exposure is associated with develop-
ment of antimicrobial resistance, potential toxicities, 
and risk for Clostridiodes difficile  infection (163, 167, 
303). Reducing both the number and the spectrum of 
antimicrobial agents may help avert some of these ad-
verse outcomes and is a key goal in hospital antimicro-
bial stewardship (304, 305). Broad-spectrum regimens 
are common during the empiric phase of treating 
sepsis when the causative pathogen has not yet been 
identified. Once pathogen identity and susceptibilities 
are determined, timely de-escalation of antimicrobial 
therapy, including stopping unnecessary antimicrobial 
therapy and switching to narrower spectrum agents, is 
a logical approach (306).
We identified direct evidence from 26 studies, in-
cluding two RCTs (307, 308). Meta-analysis was un-
certain (very low certainty evidence). However, point 
estimates suggested a possible reduction in short-term 
mortality (26 studies, RR 0.77, 95% CI, 0.64–0.92, 
very low certainty), ICU LOS (5 studies, MD 0.93 d 
fewer; 95% CI, 4.42 d fewer to 2.56 d more, very low 
certainty), hospital LOS (4 studies, 1.7 d fewer, 95% 
CI, 1.8 fewer to 1.6 fewer, very low certainty), and 
antimicrobial resistance (6 studies, RR 0.

--- 38 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock who are 
receiving empiric antifungal therapy, we “suggest 
against” use of Candida fungal biomarkers to guide 
discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence)
Remark: Use of Candida biomarkers to guide 
discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy 
may be considered on a case-by-case basis in 
clinically improving selected patients at high risk 
of Candida infection, including patients with 
immunosuppression, prolonged use of antibiotics, 
prolonged hospitalization, and intra-abdominal 
source of infection. New 
We identified three relevant RCTs (312–314). All 3 tri-
als assessed the use of (1,3)-β-d-glucan and/or man-
nan biomarkers to guide discontinuation of empiric antifungal therapy in adult ICU patients with sus-
pected invasive fungal infection.
There was possibly little to no difference in short-
term mortality (3 trials, RR 1.03; 95% CI, 0.72–1.48, 
low certainty), a possible small increase in hospital 
LOS (1 trial, MD 1.8 d more, 95% CI, 4.1 d fewer to 
7.7 d more, low certainty), and a possible increase in 
ICU LOS (1 trial, MD 5.5 d more, 95% CI, 0.9 d fewer 
to 11.9 d more, low certainty) with use of Candida  
biomarkers to guide discontinuation of empiric anti-
fungal therapy, as compared with not using biomarker-
guided discontinuation.
The panel agreed that Candida  biomarkers should 
not be used to guide discontinuation of empiric anti-
fungal therapy in all patient

--- 39 ---
For adults with an initial diagnosis of sepsis 
or septic shock and adequate source 
control, we “suggest” using shorter over 
longer duration of antimicrobial therapy.
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine  www.ccmjournal.org     33This statement was carried over, please see the 2021 
SSC guidelines for rationale (65, 66). Since the 2021 
guidelines, the BALANCE trial comparing 7 vs. 14 
days of antibiotic treatment for bloodstream infec-
tion was published, showing non-inferiority of a 7 day 
treatment duration—providing further support for 
shorter treatment durations.
Biomarker Guidance for Antibiotic 
Discontinuation

--- 40 ---
For adults with an initial diagnosis of sepsis 
or septic shock and adequate source 
control where optimal duration of therapy is 
unclear, we “suggest” using procalcitonin 
AND clinical evaluation to decide when 
to discontinue antimicrobial therapy over 
clinical evaluation alone.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Carryover 
This statement was carried over, see the 2021 SSC 
guidelines for rationale (65, 66). Since the 2021 
guidelines, the ADAPT-Sepsis RCT provided ad-
ditional evidence that procalcitonin can be used to 
safely reduce antibiotic duration in patients with 
sepsis (315).
Selective Decontamination of the Digestive 
Tract

--- 41 ---
In mechanically ventilated adults with sepsis or 
septic shock in units with a low prevalence of 
antimicrobial resistance, we “suggest” using 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract.
(conditional recommendation, moderate certainty 
evidence) New 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
(SDD) is a preventive infection control strategy 
consisting of the administration of nonabsorbable, 
topical antimicrobial agents to the oropharynx and 
upper gastrointestinal tract (oropharyngeal decon-
tamination), with the administration of a short-term 
course of broad-spectrum IV antimicrobial therapy 
in mechanically ventilated patients. The topical anti-
microbial agents used typically include a polymyxin, 
tobramycin and amphotericin B, targeting aerobic 
Gram-negative bacteria and fungi while sparing 
anaerobes. SDD is specifically designed to elimi-
nate pathogenic aerobic bacteria while preserving anaerobic gut bacteria, essential to digestion and 
immune function. It has been suggested that SDD 
improves clinical outcomes, including mortality in 
mechanically ventilated adults, through a reduction 
in the incidence of V AP and bloodstream infections 
(316). On the other hand, there are concerns that 
SDD might increase rates of antimicrobial resistance, 
although this has not been confirmed in most studies 
(317, 318). Recently, additional evidence from large 
RCTs has become available.
We identified an up-to-date systematic review 
and meta-analysis of 32 RCTs

--- 42 ---
For adults with septic shock, we “suggest” 
using either invasive or noninvasive blood 
pressure monitoring.
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: Invasive blood pressure monitoring is 
advised in patients with shock who: require 
intermediate-to-high dose vasopressors, 
escalating doses of vasopressor, or multiple 
vasopressors; are receiving frequent 
arterial blood sampling; or have noninvasive 
blood pressure measurements which are 
inconsistent on repeated assessments. Revisited 
Arterial catheters allow for continuous blood pres-
sure monitoring and frequent blood sampling, so are 
commonly used in critically ill patients. However, var -
iability in use exists across ICUs (322, 323). Potential 
benefits include continuous and more accurate blood 
pressure monitoring, ready access to arterial blood for 
analyses (e.g., blood gases, lactate), and patient com-
fort; potential downsides include risk (e.g., infection, 
thrombosis), costs, and clinician time. The 2021 SSC 
guidelines (65, 66) suggested invasive blood pressure 
monitoring as soon as practical and if resources are 
available based on the discordance of invasive and 
noninvasive measurements.
The panel Identified one RCT (324) in which adults 
admitted to the ICU were randomized in weekly 
blocks to restricted use or standard use of arterial 
catheters. However, this study was reported only in ab-
stract form, considered a mixed population (not just 
sepsis), and had minimal separati

--- 43 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend” using crystalloids as first-line 
fluid for resuscitation.
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty 
evidence) Carryover

--- 44 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock 
undergoing initial resuscitation, we “sug-
gest” using balanced crystalloids over 0.9% 
saline.
(conditional recommendation, moderate cer-
tainty evidence)
Remark: For patients with sepsis and traumatic 
brain injury, we suggest using 0.9% saline.Revisited

--- 45 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” using crystalloids alone over 
crystalloids with supplemental albumin for 
fluid resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation; moderate cer-
tainty evidence)
Remark: Use of supplemental albumin may be 
appropriate for patients who already received 
large crystalloid volumes or have cirrhosis. 
Supplemental albumin should be avoided in 
patients with traumatic brain injury.Revisited

--- 46 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“recommend against” using starches for 
resuscitation.
(strong recommendation, high-certainty 
evidence)Carryover

--- 47 ---
For adults with sepsis and septic shock, 
we “suggest against” using gelatin for 
resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation, moderate 
certainty evidence)Carryover
IV fluid administration is necessary for volume resus-
citation in sepsis and septic shock, although the op-
timal type of fluid has been debated. Carried over from 
the 2021 guidelines (65, 66), we recommend using 
crystalloids as first-line for fluid resuscitation and 
recommend against using starches. We also suggest 
against using gelatins. Please see 2021 guidelines for 
rationales regarding crystalloids as the first-line fluid 
over starches and gelatins (65, 66).
In this iteration of the guidelines, we re-evaluated 
whether to use balanced solutions, for example, lac-
tated Ringer’s solution, (vs. 0.9% saline) and albumin 
(vs. crystalloids). Although 0.9% saline remains the most widely used crystalloid (342), its use has been 
associated with hyperchloremic acidosis and acute 
kidney injury, leading to increased interest in balanced 
crystalloids due to their lower chloride content (342). 
The panel considered two recent reviews on use of bal-
anced solutions in general critical care patients with 
sepsis subgroups: one a systematic review and meta-
analysis that included 11 studies and 35,884 patients 
(343) and an individual patient data meta-analysis 
(IPDMA) derived from 5 high-quality RCTs and 6,753 
patients (344). The largest trials included in both the 
review and IPDMA were SMART (345) (15,802 tot

--- 48 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock who 
have already received fluid resuscitation with 
30 mL/kg and have persistent hypoperfusion, 
we “suggest” using either a liberal or a 
restrictive fluid resuscitation strategy based 
on individual patient and health system 
factors.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence)
Remark: There was wide variability in the 
protocols used and the volume of fluids 
received in the liberal vs. restrictive arms 
across trials. Patient and health system factors 
to be considered include patients’ current 
clinical conditions and chronic illnesses 
(e.g., heart failure) and the availability of 
monitored beds (i.e., if a restrictive approach 
necessitates vasopressor use). Revisited 
Determining the optimal volume of fluid resuscita-
tion for patients with sepsis or septic shock is difficult. 
Restrictive and liberal approaches to ongoing resuscita-
tion have been evaluated in multiple trials (121, 368–372), 
but the studies vary widely with respect to definitions for restrictive and liberal strategies, eligibility criteria, set-
ting, timing, and duration of the interventions.
To inform our updated recommendations, we con-
sidered four RCTs (133, 371, 373, 374) that included 
3,320 patients with sepsis who had ongoing hypo-
perfusion or shock after initial fluid resuscitation. 
The pooled analysis demonstrated that a restrictive 
(compared with a liberal) approach to ongoing fluid 
management resulted in probably no difference in 
m

--- 49 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, we 
“suggest” using dynamic measures to guide 
fluid resuscitation over physical examination 
or static measures alone.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) 
Remark: Dynamic measures include response 
to a passive leg raise or a fluid bolus using 
stroke volume (SV), stroke volume variation 
(SVV), pulse pressure (PP), or pulse pressure 
variation (PPV). Revisited 
Patients with sepsis or septic shock often require ad-
ditional IV fluid following an initial 30 mL/kg fluid 
resuscitation. However, additional resuscitation fluid 
must be balanced against the risk of fluid accumula-
tion and potential harm associated with fluid overload, 
for example, prolonged mechanical ventilation, pro-
gression of acute kidney injury, and increased mor -
tality. As discussed in the prior statement, liberal and 
restrictive fluid strategies were judged to be equivalent 
based on the EtD summary of judgments.
To avoid over-resuscitation or under-resuscitation, 
fluid administration beyond the initial resuscitation 
phase should be guided by careful assessment of intra-
vascular volume status, organ perfusion, and fluid re-
sponsiveness. Heart rate, central venous pressure, and 
systolic blood pressure are poor indicators of whether 
a patient will benefit from additional IV fluid. Rather, 
dynamic measures better predict fluid responsiveness 
than static measures (375). Increases of 10–15% in the 
chosen parameter (e.g., stroke volume) f

--- 50 ---
For adults with septic shock, there is “insufficient 
evidence” to make a recommendation on using 
minimally invasive or noninvasive cardiac output 
monitoring in addition to usual care.
Remark: Minimally invasive cardiac output monitoring 
refers to devices requiring an arterial catheter. 
Noninvasive cardiac output monitoring refers to 
devices using bioreactance. Usual care refers to 
care without a pulmonary artery catheter. The use 
of critical care ultrasound was not evaluated. New 
Cardiac output has historically been measured by 
pulmonary artery catheterization (380–382), but this 
technique is invasive and lacks proven benefit in sepsis 
(383, 384). More recently, minimally-invasive (using a 
peripheral arterial catheter and pulse power or pulse 
wave analysis) and noninvasive (using surface sensors 
and pulse wave analysis, bioreactance, bioimpedance, 
or other techniques) monitors have been developed 
(385), which allow continuous assessment of cardiac 
output with potentially fewer risks than pulmonary ar -
tery catheterization (386).
Three RCTs (387–389) of 225 patients evaluated 
the use of minimally invasive cardiac output moni-
tors in septic shock, with pulse wave analysis used in 
all three. These studies demonstrate an uncertain effect 
on 28-day mortality (RR 0.92; 95% CI, 0.60–1.43, very 
low certainty evidence), a possible reduction in ICU 
LOS of (MD 2.09 d fewer; 95% CI, 0.85–3.34 d fewer, 
low certainty evidence) and invasive mechanical ven-
tilation

--- 51 ---
For adults with sepsis and elevated lactate 
or septic shock, we “suggest” using serial 
lactate measurements to guide resuscitation.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) 
Remark: Fluid administration should be 
individualized after initial fluid bolus and 
monitoring of lactate decrement, rather than 
continuing fluids until lactate normalization is 
achieved. Revisited 
Serum lactate is a critical biomarker for assessing tissue 
hypoxia and dysfunction, though it does not directly 
measure tissue perfusion (393). The Sepsis-3 defini-
tions explicitly include elevated lactate as a marker of 
cellular dysfunction alongside refractory hypotension, 
underscoring its role in identifying patients requiring 
urgent resuscitation (1).
Recent evidence has refined lactate-targeted resus-
citation strategies. Meta-analyses comparing lactate-
guided therapy with traditional approaches, such as 
early goal-directed therapy or central venous oxygen 
saturation-guided therapy, consistently show that 
Prescott et al40     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4lactate-guided therapy is associated with improved 
mortality and reduced organ dysfunction (394–398). 
For example, focusing on serial lactate measurements 
and clearance rates (e.g., ≥ 10% reduction every 2 hr) 
rather than static normalization has been associated 
with better clinical outcomes, including shorter ICU 
stays and lower severity scores (395). These findings 
highlight the importance of dy

--- 52 ---
For adults with sepsis or septic shock, 
we “suggest” using capillary refill time to 
guide resuscitation as an adjunct to other 
measures of perfusion.
(conditional recommendation, low certainty 
evidence) Revisited 
CRT is a marker of peripheral tissue perfusion (402). It 
is one of the few bedside physical examination measure 
that may serve as both a triage and monitoring tool for 
resuscitation efforts in patients with sepsis or septic 
shock (403, 404). Although ambient lighting, temper -
ature, skin pigmentation, and peripheral vascular di-
sease must be considered during interpretation, CRT 
may be performed in various clinical settings (403, 
405).
Among critically ill patients, abnormal or prolonged 
CRT is associated with increased mortality, similar to other resuscitation targets such as lactate and MAP 
(406). However, MAP and lactate do not always cor -
relate with CRT for patients in shock, suggesting that 
CRT provides distinct hemodynamic information dur -
ing resuscitation (407, 408). In contrast to lactate, CRT 
can change quickly (e.g., within 10 min), allowing for 
more timely assessment of response to resuscitative 
interventions such as a fluid challenge or vasopressor 
administration (409).
We identified 2 RCTs in which 233 total patients 
were randomized to receive targeted resuscitation 
using CRT with the goal of normalizing CRT to less 
than or equal to 3 seconds or targeted resuscitation 
using lactate measured every 2 hours with a goal of nor -
m