Table 1).
METHODS
Details on the guidelines scope, relationship to SSC bundles, history, and 
sponsorship; committee selection, characteristics, and organization; conflicts 
of interest management; patient, intervention, comparator, outcome (PICO) 
question selection; outcomes prioritization; evidence synthesis; certainty of 
evidence assessment; recommendation formulation; consensus voting; and 
implications of strong vs. conditional recommendations are presented in 
Supplemental Digital Content 1 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904). We 
highlight key aspects of the methodology here.
The SSC guidelines were fully funded by Society of Critical Care Medicine 
(SCCM) and European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM), with meth-
odological support from the Guidelines in Intensive Care Medicine, Development, 
and Evaluation group. Sponsoring professional societies supported the partic-
ipation of their representatives. There was no industry support. The 69-person 
guidelines committee had broad geographic diversity, representing 23 countries, 
with 38% of panelists currently or previously practicing in a low- or middle-
income country (LMIC). The guidelines committee also had broad diversity of 
clinical professions and disciplines, as detailed in Supplemental Digital Content 1 
(https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904). We convened a patient and family advisory 
panel who worked with the committee throughout the guidelines development 
process to ensure incorporation of patients’ values and preferences.
The guidelines committee was organized into six subgroups based on clin-
ical domain: screening and early management; infection; hemodynamics; 
Prescott et al
2     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
respiratory support; adjunctive and additional therapies; and goals of care, 
transitions of care, and long-term outcomes, as well as a usability workgroup 
that developed material to support dissemination and uptake of the guidelines. 
Each subgroup had at least one panelist currently practicing in a LMIC.
Evidence Synthesis
The process for selecting PICO questions and completing evidence synthesis 
is detailed in Supplemental Digital Content 1 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H904). Prioritized patient-centered outcomes were selected a priori for each 
question. PICO questions addressed in this guideline update are presented in 
Supplemental Digital Content 2 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H905).
Evidence synthesis followed the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) methodology. Evidence profiles for 
each PICO question are presented in Supplemental Digital Content 3 (https://
links.lww.com/CCM/H906), Supplemental Digital Content 4 (https://links.
lww.com/CCM/H907), Supplemental Digital Content 5 (https://links.lww.
com/CCM/H908), Supplemental Digital Content 6 (https://links.lww.com/
CCM/H909), Supplemental Digital Content 7 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H910), and Supplemental Digital Content 8 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H911). The certainty of evidence was graded as high, medium, low, or very low 
according to GRADE methodology. We used the Evidence to Decision (EtD) 
framework (9) to support consistent, transparent, and structured formulation 
of statements across the guideline. The EtD framework considers the balance 
of effects, the certainty of evidence, as well as patient values, resource intensity, 
equity, and cost effectiveness (9). The EtD summary of judgements for each 
PICO question is presented in Supplemental Digital Content 3 (https://links.
lww.com/CCM/H906), Supplemental Digital Content 4 (https://links.lww.
com/CCM/H907), Supplemental Digital Content 5 (https://links.lww.com/
CCM/H908), Supplemental Digital Content 6 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/
H909), Supplemental Digital Content 7 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H910), 
and Supplemental Digital Content 8 (https://links.lww.com/CCM/H911). We 
used standardized language to summarize the findings of evidence syntheses 
based on effect size (i.e., point estimate) and certainty of the evidence, as rec-
ommended by GRADE methodology (10).
Process for Determining the Type of Statement
Figure 1 summarizes the stepwise process we used to determine the type of 
statement for each PICO question. In contrast to many other guidelines, we al-
ways provided a graded recommendation when there was at least low certainty 
evidence to inform a recommendation. For most PICO questions, we relied 
most heavily on the balance of desirable and undesirable effects to inform rec-
ommendations. However, when the balance of effects was equivalent, we relied 
on other domains in the EtD framework to determine the type of recommen-
dation and used “either/or” statements when the balance of all EtD domains 
for two different approaches or therapies were equivalent. However, for PICOs 
where the comparator was usual care alone, we used the language of “we make 
no recommendation due to equal balance of effects” since suggestions to use or 
Elie Azoulay, MD39
Maurizio Cecconi, MD40,41
Pauline F. Convocar, MD, MCHM42,43,44
Gennaro De Pascale, MD3,4
Kent Doi, MD, PhD45
Bin Du, MD46
Moritoki Egi, MD47
Marie-Carmelle Elie-Turenne, MD48,49
Ricard Ferrer, MD, PhD50,51
Alison Fox-Robichaud, MD52,53
Craig French, MBBS24,54
Yonathan Freund, MD, PhD55,56
Michelle Ng Gong, MD, MS57
Caleb P. Hale, MD58
Naomi E. Hammond, RN, BN, MN 
(Crit.Care), MPH, PhD59,60
Madiha Hashmi, MD, FFARCSI61
Leo Heunks, MD, PhD62
Theodore J. Iwashyna, MD, PhD63,64
Shevin T. Jacob, MD, MPH65,66
Michael Klompas, MD, MPH67,68
Arthur Kwizera, MD69
Murdoch Leeies, MD70,71
Joanna D. Lejnieks, RN72
Mitchell M. Levy, MD73
Flavia R. Machado, MD, PhD74
Marcelo O. Maia, MD75,76,77
Henry Masur, MD78
Ryan C. Maves, MD79,80
Steven McGloughlin, MD25,81
Joanne McPeake, PhD, MSc, BN 
(Hons), RGN82
Nicholas M. Mohr, MD, MS83,84,85
Sheila Nainan Myatra, MD86
Marlies Ostermann, MD, PhD87,88
Sandra L. Peake, MD, PhD, 
FCICM89,90,91
Mathias W. Pletz, MD92,93
Jason A. Roberts, PhD94,95,96
Regis G. Rosa, MD97,98,99
Robert G. Sawyer, MD100
Christa A. Schorr, RN, DNP101,102
Steven Q. Simpson, MD103
Li Weng, MD104
W. Joost Wiersinga, MD, PhD, 
MBA105,106,107
Andrew Rhodes, MBBS, MD108
Craig M. Coopersmith, MD109
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     3
TABLE 1.
Table of Statements
  
(Continued)
Prescott et al
4     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
TABLE 1, continued
 
(Continued)
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     5
 
TABLE 1,  continued
(Continued)
Prescott et al
6     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
 
TABLE 1, continued
(Continued)
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     7
 
TABLE 1, continued
(Continued)
Prescott et al
8     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
 
(Continued)
TABLE 1, continued
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     9
 
(Continued)
TABLE 1, continued
Prescott et al
10     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
not use a particular therapy were viewed as potentially 
confusing and unhelpful.
Types of Graded Recommendations
Using the GRADE approach, we classified each graded 
recommendation as either “strong” or “conditional” 
(referred to as “weak” recommendations in prior SSC 
guidelines). We used the language “we recommend” 
for strong recommendations and “we suggest” for con-
ditional recommendations, consistent with GRADE 
guidance.
Implications of Graded Recommendations
A strong recommendation indicates that most, if not 
all, individuals in the relevant clinical situation should 
receive, or avoid, the intervention. In contrast, a condi-
tional recommendation acknowledges that the balance 
between desirable and undesirable may vary depend-
ing on patient values, clinical circumstances, or re-
source availability. Conditional recommendations may 
not be universally implementable and are less likely to 
be suitable for rigid performance metrics or enforce-
ment. Flexibility and local context should guide their 
 
TABLE 1, continued
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     11
adaptation into policy. Further details on implication 
of strong vs. conditional recommendations are pre-
sented in Table 2 and Supplemental Digital Content 1 
(https://links.lww.com/CCM/H904).
Good Practice Statements
We followed the GRADE guidance to identify state-
ments that were better classified as good practice 
statements (previously referred to as “best practice 
statements” in prior SSC guidelines (11, 12). These 
statements represented guidance that did not rely on 
a formal evidence profile. We used this classification 
in situations where generating high-certainty evidence 
was infeasible. To qualify as a good practice statement, 
a recommendation had to meet all of the following 
criteria: 1) it was clear and actionable, 2) it addressed 
a necessary practice, 3) the net benefit (or harm) was 
unequivocal, 4) the evidence was difficult or inappro-
priate to summarize quantitatively, 5) the rationale was 
explicit, and 6) GRADE methods were not suitable to 
formally assess certainty of evidence.
Figure 1. Process for selecting the type of statement.
TABLE 2.
Implications of Strong Vs. Conditional Recommendations
Stakeholder Strong Recommendation Conditional Recommendation
Patients and 
families
All or most would want the intervention. Most would want the intervention, but a 
substantial proportion would not.
Clinicians The intervention should be given to all or most patients. 
There is little need for shared decision-making for tai-
loring to context.
The intervention should be done for most patients, 
but clinicians should consider shared  
decision-making, clinical context, and resources.
Policy makers Often more appropriate for policy or performance 
measure.
May be less appropriate for policy or performance 
measure.
Researchers Research resources are better spent on other topics. Additional research may be warranted and may 
change future recommendations.
Prescott et al
12     www.ccmjournal.org April 2026 • Volume 54 • Number 4
Remarks
Formal remarks were included to provide additional 
context when the statement alone could not fully cap-
ture important considerations influencing the recom-
mendation. Remarks were used to clarify or qualify 
recommendations—often in situations where the ev-
idence was weak, conflicting, or incomplete.
In Our Practice Statements
We decided a priori to include “In Our Practice” state-
ments describing the panel’s practice in areas where 
evidence was insufficient to support a formal recom-
mendation or where evidence was assessed as low or very 
low certainty and the panel determined that an “in our 
practice” statement would be helpful to end-users of the 
guideline. In our practice statements are not guidance 
or endorsement of a specific intervention. Instead, they 
document how panelists currently approach situations 
characterized by uncertainty, absence of data, or context-
specific clinical variability. The goal of these statements 
is to provide some information on current practice even 
when rigorous evidence is lacking.
Carryover Statements
We retained several statements from the 2021 SSC 
guidelines that remain clinically relevant, accurate, 
and essential to comprehensive sepsis care. These state-
ments typically addressed topics without significant 
new evidence or where further research was unlikely 
to alter prior SSC guidance. These carryover state-
ments did not undergo updated evidence synthesis, as 
they were deemed unlikely to have sufficient new ev-
idence to warrant a change in guidance based on the 
panels’ knowledge of the literature. However, the panel 
reviewed and voted for each carryover statement for 
continued relevance and accuracy.
Consensus Voting
We required a minimum 75% response rate and at least 
80% agreement among eligible panelists to finalize a 
recommendation (and associated formal remarks). For 
new or updated statements that did not meet the con-
sensus threshold on the first vote, we allowed two ad-
ditional rounds of voting to reach consensus. Between 
rounds, statements were refined based on panel feed-
back before revoting. Carryover statements were 
allowed just one round of voting. We achieved a greater 
than 98% response rate for each round of voting.
Sepsis Terminology
These guidelines define sepsis as life-threatening acute 
organ dysfunction due to infection, and septic shock 
as a subset of patients with circulatory dysfunction that 
confers a higher risk of mortality, consistent with the 
third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis 
and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3) (1). In clinical practice, di-
agnosis of sepsis and septic shock should be based on 
holistic clinical assessment, which may vary across set-
tings depending on local resources such as laboratory 
testing availability. The recommendations in the SSC 
guidelines are intended to be applied pragmatically to 
patients diagnosed with sepsis and septic shock accord-
ing to local practice. Furthermore, we did not restrict lit-
erature searches or evidence syntheses to studies using 
the Sepsis-3 definition, as studies using prior sepsis defi-
nitions are still informative to current practice.
Because the diagnosis of sepsis may be uncertain in 
clinical practice, we developed standardized language for 
definite, probable, possible, and unlikely sepsis, which 
are used throughout the SSC guidelines (Table 3).
TABLE 3.
Sepsis Terminology in This Guideline
Definite sepsis Sepsis is confirmed based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing. An alternative diagnosis 
is very unlikely. 
Probable sepsis High suspicion for sepsis. Sepsis is the most likely diagnosis based on history, clinical examination, and 
diagnostic testing. An alternative diagnosis is less likely.
Possible sepsis Moderate suspicion for sepsis. Sepsis is a possible diagnosis; however, an alternative diagnosis is also 
likely based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing.
Unlikely sepsis Low suspicion for sepsis. Clinical assessment is not consistent with sepsis, or an alternate diagnosis is 
more likely based on history, clinical examination, and diagnostic testing.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine www.ccmjournal.org     13
SCREENING AND EARLY MANAGEMENT
Performance Improvement Programs
1. For hospitals and health 
systems, we “recommend” 
using a performance 
improvement program for 
sepsis, including sepsis 
screening for acutely ill, 
high-risk patients; standard 
operating procedures for 
treatment; and implementation 
of sepsis quality improvement 
strategies.
(strong recommendation, 
moderate certainty evidence 
for screening)
(strong recommendation, very low 
certainty evidence for standard 
operating procedures)
(strong recommendation, 
moderate certainty evidence for 
quality improvement strategies)
Remark: Performance 
improvement programs and 
qualit
